 




WARSHIPS
BY RICHARDBAKER

FOR THEOFFICERS ANDCREW OF THEUSS TORTUGA (LSD-46)

      Additional Credits Copyediting: Miranda Horner Cartography: Christopher West Creative Direction: Richard Baker Web Production: Sue Weinlein Cook


Based on theALTERNITY(r) rules created by Bill Slavicsek and Richard Baker


U.S., CANADA	EUROPEAN HEADQUARTERS
ASIA, PACIFIC, & LATIN AMERICA	Wizards of the Coast, Belgium Wizards of the Coast, Inc.		P.B. 2031
P.O. Box 707	2600 Berchem
Renton WA 98057-0707	Belgium
+32-70-23-32-77
Questions? 1-800-324-6596

ALTERNITYand STAR*DRIVEare registered trademarks of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. All Wizards characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by Wizards of the Coast, Inc. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of this product is prohibited without the express w- ritten con sent of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. This product is a work of fiction. Any similarity to actual people, organizations, places, or events is purely coincidental. (c)2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc. All rights reserved.

Visit our website awt ww.wizards.com/alternity

2	TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction
The Warship as a Weapon.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4. . .
...And as an Instrument of Diploma.c.y	4
Spacepower. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4. . .
How Do I Use This Book?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5. . .
Sideba:r What's New Here	5.
Definitions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6. .

Chapter 1:  Basic Comba t
Setting Up. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8. .
Game Scale. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8. .
Ship Data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8. . .
Sequence of Play. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9. .
Edge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9. .
Movement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9. .
Fire	12
Sidebar: Decoys	13
Damage	13
Sideba:r Damage Procedure.s	1.4
The Battleground	16
Tactics	18
Chapter 2:  Ad vanced Comba t
Sequence of Play	19
Edge Phase	19
Power	19
Sensors	20
Sidebar: Tactical Datalinks	20
Sidebar: Facing	21
Movement	21
Attack Phase	22
Damage	24
Special Orders	30
Squadron Actions	32
Fusion Age Space Comba.t	33
Chapter 3:  Narr ative Comba t
Heroes in Combat	36
Combat without Miniatures	40
Sideba:r Crew Requirements	42

Chapter 4: The Cold Hard Facts
Fight or Flight	4. 4. .
Acceleration	45
Relativity	46
Sidebar: What Is the Speed of Light.?	47
3D Combat. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.7. .
Chapter 5:  Ship Construction
Ship Design Checklis. t	50
Sidebar: Helpful Hint	50
Technology	51
Sideba:r Tech Tracks in Star*Driv.e	52
Step 1: Class and Hu.ll	53
Sideba:r What's a Class, Really?	53
Step 2: Armor	58
Step 3: Power Plan.t	58
Sideba:r Design Tip: Armor	58
Sideba:r Design Tip: Power	61
Step 4: Engines	62
Sidebar: Design Tip: Engines	63
Step 5: FTL Drive	64
Step 6: Support Systems and Crew Quarters. . .6.7. .
Sideba:r What Do I Really Need Here. ?	67
Step 7: Weapons	70.
Sideba:r Launched Ordnance	7.7
Sideba:r Sample Bomb and Missile Systems	83
Step 8: Defenses	86
Step 9: Command and Contr.o.l	90
Sidebar: Design Tip: Sensors	93
Step 10: Sensors	93
Step 11: Hangars and Small Cra.ft	97
Step 12: Miscellaneous Installatio.ns	98
Step 13: Adding It Up	101
The Fire Diagram	101
Damage Diagram	101
An Example of Ship Constructio. n	102
Sideba:r The Endurance	106
Chapter 6:  Stations and Bases
Facilities	108
Missions	109
Stations in Combat	110

Appendix: Space Combat Hex Maps
Color Map	111
Black-and-White Map	112

TABLES AND DIAGRAMS	3

Tables
Table 1-1: Crew Quality. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8. . .
Table 1-2: Ablative Shields	1.4
Table 1-3: Downgrading	15
Table 1-4: Upgrading	15
Table 2-1: Mine Attacks	22
Table 2-2: Missile Flight Attack.s	23
Table 2-3: Explosion Damag.e	25
Table 2-4: Hit Locations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.7. .
Table 2-5: Squadron Attack.s	32
Table 3-1: Random Hazards (d20)	39
Table 3-2: Character Injury	40
Table 3-3: Bail-Out Time.s	40
Table 3-4: Narrative Movemen. t	41
Table 4-1: Speeds	4. 4.
Table 4-2: Orbital Window.s	45
Table 4-3: Stopping Distance (Spd 10)	45
Table 4-4: Gamma	46
Table 5-1: Hulls	55
Table 5-2: Armor	59
Table 5-3: Power Plants	60
Table 5-4: Engines	62
Table 5-5: FTL Drives	65
Table 5-6: Support Systems	66
Table 5-7: Hull Point Costs for Fixed Mounts aunrdreTts	71
Table 5-8: Beam Weapons. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7.3. .
Table 5-9: Projectile Weapon.s	7.5
Table 5-10: Missiles, Bombs, and Min.es	78-80
Table 5-12: Torpedoes and Special Weapons	85
Table 5-11: Area Effect Weapons	82
Table 5-13: Defensive System.s	8.7
Table 5-14: Command, Control, and Communication 9. 0. . . Table 5-14a: Computers	91
Table 5-15: Sensors	94
Table 5-16: Tracking Capabili.ty	95
Table 5-17: Hangars and Miscellaneous Installatio. n. s98 Table 5-18: Hit Locations and Zone Limits	103
Table 6-1: Stations and Base. s	108

Diagrams
Diagram 1-1a: Color Ma.p	110
Diagram 1-1b: Black-and-White Map	111
Diagram 1-2: Maneuvers	11
Diagram 1-3: Arcs of Fir.e	12
Diagram 2-1: Hit Location Diagram. s	26
Diagram 2-1a: Vector Arrow, Speed 8	34
Diagram 2-1b: Maneuvers, Acceleration 2	34
Diagram 2-1c: New Vecto.r	35
Diagram 2-1d: Facing	35

4	INTRODUCTION
From the beginning of time, humankind has engaged in- war	Finally, the ancient art of espionage is one more aspect
fare. Conflict, violence, and conquest are a part of the humaonf diplomacy. A warship is an excellent platform for all condition, which is a fact of life that seems unlikely to changekinds of secret operations, covert strikes, sabotage, intel- with the simple advance in technological progress. Whi-le sciligence-gathering efforts, and clandestine meetings. In ence fiction often features benevolent aliens and incrediblefact, most warships spend as much time in diplomatic social advances, it is ultimately a genre of speculation aboumt issions as they do in fleet exercises or similar prepara- the human condition. And that means that war is a centratlions for war.
theme of a great amount of science fiction.

  Some of the most famous works of the genre featu-re in terplanetary, interstellar, or even intergalactic conflicts of staggering scale. Even the stories that present humanity as a united, advanced species often pit terrifying and implacable

Sur veys, Explor ation, and Research

aliens against the forces of civilization; science fiction storieFsor centuries, the navies of Earth's maritime powers without the specter of warfare are the exception, not the ruleb.acked extensive efforts to explore and chart the world
around them. While some of this effort produced clear na-

THE WARSHIP AS A
WEAPON . . .

tional benefits-the discovery of new lands to colonize, for instance-these same efforts were also instrumental in shaping our understanding of the world we inhabit. Mili- tary vessels carried scientific expeditions to the far cor-

Of all the weapons that may be employed in these futuristicners of the world and contributed greatly to the advance conflicts, the warship is the most complex and powerful. Likeof knowledge.
any weapon, it may be used in the defense of the innocent, Major warships detached to exploration or scientific
the oppression of the weak, or the destruction of a mort-al enmissions are a staple of science fiction. Knowledge is emy. Unlike a pistol or a rifle, though, the warship has th-e capower, after all, and the more the heroes discover about pacity to affect issues on a planetary scale. Heroes servingthe universe, the better they can represent their society's aboard a warship are affecting the plot at an epic level, andinterests. Even if a ship is assigned to strictly military

deciding the fates of entire worlds.
. . . A ND AN INSTRUMENT OF DIPLOMACY

tasks, space is full of anomalies, mysteries, and unchart- ed systems for the heroes to explore and study.

SPACEPOWER
As soon as humanity mastered the technology of crossing

The most effective weapon is the weapon that is never-needseas and oceans, seapower began to shape the course of ed. In the delicate balance of power between rival societiesh,istory. It only stands to reason that, as humankind expands a warship is a statement of intent and resolve. It is a d- eterinto the galaxy, the control of space as the common ground
rent?threat in being.	between myriad island-worlds will be just as important as
  As the visible symbol of a nation's strength and cert,aintyseapower was to the historical interaction of Earth's rival the warship is often a center of diplomacy and intrigue.nations.
Showing the flag over the skies of distant worlds can bolster The ultimate point of spacepower is to use space travel
weak allies, intimidate enemies, and sway undecided partietso support your own goals and ends, while denying your in favor of the nation that has demonstrated its ability to- projenemy the ability to do the same. The logical extension of ect force to the planet in question. Just being in the right plactehis philosophy is simple. Most naval enterprises consist of at the right time can sway the course of events in favor of theone of four basic missions: Protection of the homeland, de-
nation willing to show its teeth.	fense of the spaceways, projection of power against enemy
  When showing the flag is not enough, gunboat diplomacystates, and the disruption of another nation's use of com- is still one of the most direct tools of statesmanship availablemerce, communications, and transport.
to a society's leaders. If the presence of a warship is the most A warship under the command of a group of player
powerful factor in a contentious situation, the judicious -applicharacters in a roleplaying game is not a license to threat- cation of a little force may produce results that diplomacyen or destroy any who offend the characters. It's an instru- alone couldn't match. Quick strikes to neutralize the ca-pabilment of national policy, and characters in command of ma- ities of rivals, replace difficult local leaders, or simply seize ajor warships aren't looking out just for themselves-rtehey' better position may not call for the military destruction oflooking out for the interests of their nations.
those who oppose the cause the warship supports.	In time of war, they may be required to serve as part

of a fleet raiding enemy territory, defending a vital sector,gaming group's next adventure. Imagine what your play- or quietly avoiding enemy contact in preparation for aers will do when they have the whole galaxy ahead of major clash. They might be tasked with extended missionstheir heroes, and the perfect plot device-a starship-to ex- of commerce raiding, tedious blockades of enemy sys-plore its most distant corners.
tems, or convoy duties. In other words, the great majority of naval missions are designed to impede the enemy's

command of the spaceways or to use spacepower to ad- vance the nation's war aims. Seeking out and destroying the enemy fleet wherever it hides is a strategy reserved for a fleet confident in its superior strength or desperate enough to take a big gamble.

HOW DO I USE THIS BOOK?
Warshipsconsists of five basic partsC.hapter 1through Chapter 3outline the mechanics of combat between capital ships and their escorts, first as a system suitable for minia- tures and then as an expansion of theLTEARNITY game space combat rules.
  Chapter 4covers some of the issues of real science in a space battle. If you want your space battles to be mroer-e " alistic," you'll find information here for adding more science to your science fiction.
  Chapter 5contains a detailed ship construction system for creating warships, heavy transports, and space stations for your own ALTERNITYcampaign.
  Finally, Chapter 6introduces the concepts of space sta- tions and other bases to the game..

Getting Started
Before you start a combat, you'll want to track down a large mat or poster printed with hexagons, preferably at least 3/4" or 1" in size. Smaller hex maps are printed in the Appendixfor you to photocopy. Spaceship miniatures are fairly easy to find in any good hobby store; if you can't find real metal miniatures, buy a five-pack of MicroMa- chines or Star Warsor Star Trek plastic miniatures. Of course, cardboard counters work, too.
As you explore the rest of the book, try building your
own spaceships using the rules in Chapter Five. You don't need to run an ALTERNITYgame to playWarshipsas a set
of tactical and strategic rules for interstellar warfare.

As an ALTERNITY Rules Expansion
If you're reading this book, it's pretty likely that yreou' both an ALTERNITYplayer and a fan of epic space combat. Warshipsshould be very useful to you, since it expands your game on several fronts. Not only do we present rules for all kinds of starships in this book, but there's also a tremendous amount of information that will help you to put your players on the bridge of their very own capital ship.
Use the rules inChapter 5to create the setting for your

What's New Here?

6	DEFINITIONS

Exceeding the target's wound damage track cripples th-e ves sel; exceeding the mortal damage track destroys the vessel;

rules:
Acceleration: Acceleration is the amount of velocity a

explode or disintegrate.
Damage Check: A damage check is a crew check made

ship can add to its current speed in a single phase. Fo- r exto determine whether or not a system exposed to damage ample, a ship with an acceleration of 1 (one megameter percontinues to function or not.
turn per turn) can increase its speed from 2 to 3 meg-ame	Demand: Demand is the amount of fuel, stores, or power
ters per turn in a single turn. That's about 4,000 Gs, in caseconsumed per day by a system. For example, a crew of ten

you were wondering.
Accommodation:sAccomodations are any facility- in

men demands ten days of stores per .day
Downgrade: When a weapon strikes a target whose

stalled to provide living space for crewmen, officers, troopst,oughness exceeds the weapon's firepower, the weaspon'

passengers, and passengers traveling in cold sleep.
Armor Check: An armor check is a roll of the ship's-ar

damage roll downgrades one or more damage categories- mortal to wound, wound to stun, stun to no effect.

mor rating to negate some or all of the primary damage of  Drive: The drive is the ship's faster-than-light engine or
an attack. Secondary damage always leaks through asship'mechanism.

armor.
Artificial Gravity: Artificial gravity is any means of s-im
  
Efficiency: Efficiency is a measure of how many days of power a single hull point of fuel contains. For example, a fuel

ulating Earth-normal gravity on a spaceship. Constant -accelwith an efficiency of 20 holds 20 power-days per hull point; eration or centrifugal force can simulate gravity, but this terma single hull point could power a demand of 1 per day for normally refers to advanced technology that actually g-ener20 days, or a demand of 10 for 2 days.

ates a controlled gravity field for a ship.
Attack Roll: An attack roll is a crew check for the p-ur
  
Embarked Craf:t Embarked craft are fighters, launches, strike craft, and so on carried in a ship's hangar or docking

poses of attempting to use a weapon against an enemy shipc.lamps.
Battery: A battery is a grouping of weapons of the same	Engine: The engine is a ship's slower-than-light engine or
type. For example, a battleship with four strong force gunspropulsion.
might group all four into a single battery. Batteries are often Fire Mode: Fire mode is the type of attack a particular
referred to as primary, secondary, and tertiary, depending onweapon can make: normal fire (F), battery fire (G), burst fire
how many the ship carries.	(B), or autofire (A).
Class: Class is a general measure of the ship's size and  Firepower: Firepower is the general power of an attack,
capability, ranging from small craft to super-he.avy	which is compared to the target's toughness to determine if
  Compartmen:t A compartment is one room or a small the damage is upgraded or downgraded. Firepower ratings number of rooms dedicated to the same purpose and locaterdange from Small (the same as an Amazing rating inAthL-e
in the same part of the hull. IWnarships, systems need not TERNITY game) to Super-Heavy, and generally correspond
be assigned to specific compartments-the hit location checwkith the class of the ship.
indicates what systems are endangered by any enemy shot. Fuel: Some power plants and engine systems require
Control Die: All Attack Rolls and crew, sensor, and d-am large amounts of fuel-usually, hydrogen.
age checks are based on thAeLTERNITYgame system Core	Hull: Hull refers to the ship's specific type-destroye-,r bat
Mechanic. The control die is always a d20, rolled as a partleship, carrier, and so on.

of one of these checks.
Core Mechanic: Almost all die rolls in theLATERNITYgame

Hull Points: Hull points is a measure of the hull's size.
Systems installed in the ship take up hull points.

system are based on the core mechanic: Roll a d20 control die Launched Ordnanc:eLaunched ordnance are missiles,
and add or subtract a second situation die. A roll is successfuml ines, bombs, and similar weapons that deliver a warhead if the total of the control die and situation die is less than orto the target.
equal to the appropriate skill score or target number. The core Life Suppor:t Life support is a system that provides heat,
mechanic is explained in Chapter 1: Basic Combat.	oxygen, and a safe environment to the ship's crew in the- mid
Course:Course is the current heading of the ship. A shipdle of deep space.
must maneuver to change its course.	Mm (Megameter): A megameter is a unit of measu-re
  Crew Check: A crew check is a roll against the quality ment equal to 1,000 kilometers. Each hex on the mapsheet rating of the crew. Sensor checks, attack rolls, and damageis assumed to be 1 megameter wide.
checks are all just varieties of the crew check.	Mortal Damage: Mortal damage is serious damage to
  Critical Damage: Ships have four damage tracks: stun, the ship's structural integrity and systems function. Mortal wound, mortal, and critical damage. Compartment damagedamage is more serious than wound damage, but less- dan represents damage that can destroy one or more of thesship'gerous than compartment damage.
compartments with a single hit.	Power: Many of a ship's most vital systems require large
  Damage:Weapons inflict some amount of stun, wound, amounts of power. Power is produced by the ship's power mortal, or critical damage points with a successful attack rollp.lant, and then distributed to the various systems that are

needed at that moment. Along with hull points and m,oney Step:A step indicates an increase or decrease in the- dif	7
  Power Points: Power points is a measure of how much nus step) lowers the situation die by one type-d8 to d6, d6 power a system produces or requires. A ship producing 100to d4, d4 to d0, d0 to -d4, and so on. A penalty step (or plus power points could power five systems requiring 20 pointsstep) increases the die by one type-d6 to d8, d8 to d12, and

each, 10 requiring 10 points, and so on.
Primary Damage: All weapons are rated for how

so on.
Stores: Stores are food, water, and other expendable- ma

much damage they produce on an Ordinary, Good, orterials required by a crew in space. A ship's crew consumes Amazing hit. The die range and type (stun, wound, mortalo, ne day of stores per crewman per day, so a crew of 400 or critical) of damage listed for the weapon is considered torequires 400 days of stores per day in space.
be the primary damage of the attack. In addition, a weapon Stun Damage:Stun damage is minor damage that is- un
hit inflicts secondary damage equal to half the primarylikely to cause a major system failure, hull breach, or s-truc damage in all categories (stun, wound, or mortal) below thetural damage.

primary damage.
For example, a CHE missile inflicts 1d6+1 points of
  
System Damage:When a ship suffers damage from a successful attack roll, one or more of the ship's systems may

wound damage on a Good hit; if the damage roll came up 5b,e affected. The hit location check is a roll ToAnBLE 2-4 to the primary damage of the attack would be 5 wound pointss. ee what system a particular hit affects.
The secondary damage is 2 stun points.	Target Modifier: The target modifier bonus or penalty to
  Primary damage can be partially or completely blocked byany attack roll made against a particular ship, based on its the target's armor check. Secondary damage is never -affectsize. Large ships are bigger targets and easier to hit than
ed by armo.r	small ships.
Primary damage may upgrade or downgrade depending Tech Track: Not every device or technology may be
on the weapon's firepower and the target's toughness.	available to all civilizations at the same Progress Level. The
  Progress Leve:l Progress Level is a measure of the tech track codes certain types of ship systems to particular technology a particular society or civilization has achievedb. ranches of technology, which may or may not be available Progress Level ranges from 0 (the Stone Age) through, 6, 7to a particular civilization.
8, and 9-the Fusion, Gravity, Energy and Matter Ages.	Toughness: Toughness is a measure of the ship's re-sist
  Secondary Damag:eA successful weapon strike causes ance to weapons fire. While armor negates some or all of the secondary damage equal to half the primary damage in aldl amage of an attack, a ship's toughness may cause th-e cat damage categories below the damage inflicted by the initiaelgory of damage inflicted (stun, wound, mortal, or com- part strike. In other words, if a weapon inflicts 6 points of mortalment) to downgrade before armor is even rolled. for
damage as its primary damage, it also inflicts 3 wound points Type (Damage):The nature of an attack-low impact,
and 3 stun points as secondary damage. Always roundhigh impact, or energy. Various types of armor protect

down.
Armor has no effect on secondary damage.

against different types of attacks at different levels.
Upgrade: When a weapon strikes a target whose to-ugh

  Sensor Check: Sensor checks are a special kind of crew ness is less than the weapon's firepower, the weapon's- dam check made for the purpose of using the ship's sensors-to deage roll upgrades one or more damage categories-stun to

tect a target.
Situation Die:The situation die is the second half of the

wound, wound to mortal, or mortal to compartment.
Warhead: The warhead is the business end of a missile,

Alternity game's core mechanic. It may be a d4, d6, d8, d12b, omb, or mine. The warhead determines how much damage or d20 that is either added to or subtracted from the d20the weapon inflicts.
Control Die as part of a skill roll, Crew Check, or similar task. Wound Damage: Wound damage is significant damage
The situation die reflects conditions that make success mortehat may knock out minor systems, create holes in unim- por or less likely. A minus die (-d4, -d6) is an advantage, sincetant compartments, or wreck unprotected equipment on the it reduces the result of the control die and makes it more- likeexterior of the ship. More serious than stun damage, but not
ly that the roll succeeds against the target num. ber	as bad as mortal or compartment damage.

8	CHAPTER 1: BASIC COMBAT

Science fiction movies, books, and games are filled with thrilling combat scenes between space-going dreadnoughts and star fighters. A big space battle might include dozens or hundreds of ships on a side, but for now we'll concentrate on the classic duels between a handful of ships on each side.
  In this chapter, we'll present a starship combat system adaptable to a variety of technologies, tactics, and situations.

Table 1-1: Crew Quality
Quality	Description	Score
Marginal	Green	10
Ordinary	Trained	12
Good	Veteran	14
Amazing	Crack	16
For example, all attack rolls made by a ship with a green

SETTING UP
So, you're playing in your weekAlyLTERNITYgame, and all of

crew hit on a roll of 10 or less, while a veteran crew scores hits on a roll of 14 or less. Crew quality is often decisive in encounters between fleets with roughly equal numbers and

a sudden a Thuldan battlecruiser shows up and starts s-hoo technolog.y

    ing at the heroes' ship. Where do you start?
The Ships
  
For more information on how youAr LTERNITYcharacter can affect the course of a major battle, refeCr htoapter 2: Ad - vanced Combaat nd Chapter 3: Narrative Comb.at

First of all, who's on each side? If you're in the middle of a roleplaying scenario for youArLTERNITYgame, you probably

GAME SCALE

have a good idea of what ship the heroes are flying, andIn the basic rules, we're going to concentrate on battles
who's likely to be on the other end of the heroes' guns.	between ships of Progress Level 7 (the Gravity Age) or 8
  If you're setting up a starship combat scenario just to play(the Energy Age). The best scale for an encounter between out a battle, create a couple of ships and set them up on eacshhips of this technology is about 1,000 kilometers per side. Try to keep the number of ships on each side to five ohr ex. One thousand kilometers equals 1 megameter, so less, unless you've got a lot of time on your hands and youweapon ranges are given in hexes or megameters.
don't mind slugging out an epic battle. If you're trying t-o ref	Each game round represents about 30 seconds of real
eree the outcome of a Jutland-like engagement in which thetime. A ship moving at a speed of 4 hexes per round ac- heroes' ship is involved, it might be better to set up two totually travels at a rate of 8,000 kilometers per minute, or four sequential engagements with a small number of enemy480,000 kilometers per hour. By comparison, the speed ships representing hard-fought encounters within the grandof light is 300,000 kilometers per second. A ship moving

scope of the epic battle.
The Map

at a speed of 15 hexes per round is flying at the speed of 30,000 kilometers per minute, or roughly 1/600th the speed of light. Space battles take place at a small fraction of light speed.

Several companies manufacture cardboard or felt maps printed in starfields. You can play the game without a map (seeChapter 3: Narrative Comb) abtut you'll find that the su-b

SEQUENCE OF PLAY

tleties of movement and position may be difficult to keepIn the basic game, play proceeds in a number of rounds. track of without some kind of physical representation ofEach round follows the sequence of play outlined below:

where each ship is in relation to the others.
  If you can find the space, set up several map sheets t-o cre ate a large battlefield so that you don't have to keep shifting ships that would otherwise "go off the edge" during their movement.

The Cr ew
You may have your ownALTERNITYcharacters manning cr-it ical stations, but for the basic combat rules, we're going-to as sume that all crewmen on a ship are equal.
  Crew quality determines the skill score (or target number) of attack rolls, pilot checks, repair checks, and similar die rolls.

Edge Phase Movement Phase
a. Capital Ships
b. Medium and Light Ships
c. Small Craft
     d. Missiles Fire Phase
a. Beams and Projectiles
b. Torpedoes and Special
c. Missile Attacks
     d. Bomb Attacks Launch Phase
Repair Phase

EDGE
The edge represents a tactical or situational advantag held by one side or the other. The commander with th edge can discern enemy movements and respond to the more effectively than his foes. In a close-fought battle, th edge may shift a number of times from one side to th other.
  The side currently holding the edge is called the edg player or edge fleet; the side without the edge is called th opposing player or opposing fleet.
Determining Edge
At the beginning of each round of combat, the command er of each fleet should roll a crew check against the cre skill of the flagship. Any medium, heavy, or super-heav ship can be designated as the flagship of a fleet. If the fle contains no ships large enough to qualify, any light shi present can become the flagship. Finally, if no light ship are present, any small craft can be designated the flag ship. The captain with the best success in the crew chec wins the edge.
If both sides achieve the same level of success, th
commander with the fewest ships wins the edge. If bot sides have the same number of ships, then reroll to brea the tie.

Effects of Edge
The chief effect of edge is simple: During each step of the
movement phase, the edge player may move his ships af-tage, the decision of how close to get to the enemy and ter the opposing player moves hers. In other words, thewhich side of the ship to expose to enemy fire can be just edge player gets to see where his opponent is moving toas important. Many battle doctrines are founded on the
before he commits to moving his own forces.	idea of exploiting a range at which your weapons are su-
  This is a serious advantage, since it means that theperior to the enemys.' edge fleet can choose the range for each round of fire, and

it may "cross the T" or pull off similar tactical coups with some careful positioning.

Movement Steps


Edge Check Modifiers

The movement phase is broken up into several steps: capital ship movement, medium and light ship movement, small craft movement, and missile movement. This does-

Several circumstances may modify the edge check for onen't mean that heavy ships move faster than small ones; it
side or the other. These include the following:	means that heavy ships must commit to their maneuvers
• +1, +2, or +3 step penalty if the flagship is shaken, and positioning before smaller vessels, so small ships
disabled, or crippled (see "Damage").	have the advantage of seeing where the big ships are go-
• +4 step penalty if the flagship is destroyed (this ap-ing before they perform their own movement. plies to the new flagship's first edge check).

• -1 step bonus per enemy ship destroyed in the previ-
ous round (excluding small craft).
• -2 step bonus if the commander received reinforce- ments in the previous round.

MOVEMENT
Positioning is key in any battle. While space usually lacks

Movement Steps
a. Heavy and Super-heavy Ships
b. Medium and Light Ships
c. Small Craft
d. Antiship Missiles
e. Counter-missile Missiles

During each step, ships of the opposing fleet move first,

any terrain features worth exploiting for tactical advan-followed by ships of the edge fleet. If one player doesn't

have any ships of the appropriate size, she simply skips steps until she reaches a step matching the ships under

Heading

her command.

Movement Basics

A ship's heading is the course it is currently traveling. Like speed, it remains the same from round to round until the ship takes some action to change its heading. To change heading, a ship must perform a maneuver during the course of its

In space, an object in motion remains in motion. Even if amovement. ship makes no maneuvers or puts no power into its engines
at all, it will continue on its last course and speed forever (or until it's captured in a celestial body's gravity well). Simply


Acceler ation

move a coasting ship the same number of hexes on the samEevery ship has an acceleration rating that measures how

heading it used last round.

Speed
A ship's speed is the number of hexes it will move in the- cur

much it can change its speed in one round. For instance, a cruiser might have an acceleration of 3. If its current speed is 5, the cruiser can set any speed from 2 to 8 in its current move.
Acceleration or deceleration takes place at ethned of the

rent round. Speed is retained from round to round, re-gardship's movement. In other words, a ship that begins the round less of whether or not a ship actually maneuvers or evenat speed 3 and then accelerates to speed 5 is moving at a provides power to its engines. For example, if a cruise-r enspeed of 3 until it moves three hexes-and then it moves two ters a battle traveling at a speed of 4, it will move 4 hexesmore hexes, traveling at a speed of 5. Most of the time this per round in each subsequent round until it maneuver-s, acdoesn't matter, but it may be important for maneuvering- pur celerates, or is destroyed. If the cruiser accelerates in theposes.
third round of the battle to a speed of 6, it will move 6-hex  Ships need not change facing to decelerate. The engines
es each round until it does something to change its speedused by ships in the basic combat rules are not reaction
again.	drives, and they don't have to maneuver like real rocke-t-pro
Unless the scenario states otherwise, assume that all shippselled spacecraft do.
begin the first round of the battle with a speed of 0. They An acceleration of 1 is roughly equal to 3,300 G-ships of
must accelerate to move across the map sheet.	PL 7 and higher require powerful inertial dampers or -com
  There is no upper limit to a ship's speed. It just dependspensation to survive maneuvers this violent. on what the ship's acceleration rating is and how many

rounds the ship spends accelerating. However, the faster a ship is traveling, the harder it is to perform maneuvers or

Maneuvers

change heading.	For the basic combat game, we're assuming that starships
  In general, most battles will take place at speed ranges oaf re equipped with engines that permit cinematic maneuvers- 0 to 10 hexes per round. Relativity effects begin to kick inbanks, loops, turns, and rolls. In effect, the gravity induction around a speed of 2,000 or so, but ships moving this fast ar engine engages a medium against which it can exert force- so hard to engage and have so little ability to engage theitrhe omnipresent gravitational energy of the universe. We'll targets that there's no point in describing the exact detailse.xamine other methods for moving and maneuvering ships
(SeeChapter 4: The Cold Hard Facftosr more information.)  in Chapter 2: Advanced Comb. at
Ships moving at very high speeds may be harder to hit than Ships may perform a number of maneuvers in one round

slow-moving targets.
  A speed of 1 is roughly equal to 120,000 kilometers per hour.

equal to their Maneuverability Class.
  A speed of 5-8 reduces a ship's MC by 1 point; a speed of 9-12 reduces MC by 2 points; a speed of 13 to 16 reduces MC by 3 points. (Every 4 points of speed reduces ma- neu verability class by an additional point.)
A ship at MC 0 can only make maneuvers once every- oth

er round. A ship at MC -1 can maneuver once per three rounds; MC -2, once per four rounds; and so on.
There are four basic maneuvers available to a ship:
  Straight:The ship simply moves forward one hex per point of speed. This isn't really a maneuver. A ship doesn't have to use its engines or perform any maneuvers to keep moving straight ahead.
  Roll: The ship moves into any one of the four hexes o-n ei ther side instead of moving into the hex directly ahead of it and maintains its current heading. Executing a roll does not cost any speed points.

  Turn: The ship moves forward one hex and then change its heading by one hexside. Changing heading counts as o point of speed, so a ship with a speed of 5 could move 5- hex es in a straight line, or 4 hexes and turn.
  Loop and Turn:The ship moves straight ahead one hex and then selects any new heading desired. This costs tw- o e tra points of speed, so a ship with a speed of 5 could mov 3 hexes and execute a loop and turn maneu. ver

Missile Mo vement
  Missiles are placed on the map during the launch phas In the movement phase of the following round, they ca-n be gin to maneuver toward their target. For purposes of th-e ba sic game, all missiles have an acceleration of 6 and a- Ma neuverability Class of 5. Missiles move last in the moveme phase, since their targeting systems predict ship moveme with uncanny accuracy. Missiles that don't reach their targ with 6 rounds run out of power and coast.
Note that missiles don't automatically detonate the insta
they reach their target. In fact, missile detonations are the la step in the fire phase. This reflects the fact that antimissile fir may knock down the missile before it delivers its warhead.
  To make an attack in the fire phase, the missile must mov into or through the same hex as its intended target. (The- mi sile's movement stops when it enters its target's hex.) If th missile can't get into the target's hex in the current round, i can't make an attack roll.

Counter-Missiles
Missiles assigned to attack other missiles have a speci-al a vantage; they move after all antiship missiles have move regardless of which side has the tactical edge. For the sak of sanity, you can assume that it's possible for a missile t target an enemy antiship missile, but not an enemy counter missile missile. In other words, there are two valid targets fo a missile: an enemy ship (in which case it's an ASM, o-r an tiship missile) or an enemy antiship missile (in which casse it' a SAM, or ship-to-air missile).

Launch and Reco  ver y
Missiles, fighters, and other embarked craft don't begin pla on the map. They must be launched before they can begin t move. The launch phase takes place after the fire phase, s just-launched missiles and fighters can't be attacked un- til a ter they've had a chance to move at least one time.
  During the launch phase, the opposing player mus-t de clare her launches first, followed by the edge player. New
missile markers or ship miniatures are simply placed in thephase in the same hex as the carrier, with the same heading same hex as the launching vessel. They assume the la-unchand a speed equal to or not more than 1 point higher than ing vessel's speed and heading upon launch, but they dont'the recovering ship. A determined commander could p-roba get to maneuver independently until the movement phase obfly recover missiles that run out of power after a basttle'
the following round.	over, but most prefer to self-destruct the weapons.
  Carriers may recover fighters and other small craft (or fighters can dock with other ships) by ending their movement

FIRE

Targeting

Players conduct their attacks in the fire phase. Like m- oveIn each step of the fire phase, the opposing player announces ment, the fire phase is broken up into a hierarchy of attacks:her targets and conducts her attacks first. Damage is s- imul beams and projectiles, then torpedoes and special weaponsta,neous, so there's no advantage in attacking first. In fact, the and finally missile and bomb attacks. A ship destroyed byedge player has the advantage, since he can wait and see beam fire in the first step can't fire its torpedoes in the- sechow his opponent's attacks go before he decides how his ond step; the beam fire knocked it out before it could use itships will respond.
own weapons. The exact order of fire looks like this:

• Opposing fleet beam fire
• Edge fleet beam fire
• Beam damage takes effect
• Opposing fleet torpedo fire
• Edge fleet torpedo fire
• Torpedo damage takes effect
• Opposing fleet antimissile fire
• Edge fleet antimissile fire
• Anti-missile hits take effect
• Opposing fleet antiship missile fire
• Edge fleet antiship missile fire
• Antiship missile damage takes effect
• Opposing fleet bomb attacks
• Edge fleet bomb attacks
• Bomb damage takes effect

Arcs of Fir e
  Most shipboard weapons can't fire in all directions at once. For purposes of the basic game, there are six arcs of fire- : for ward, aft, port, starboard, and zero-port and zero-starboard. Usually, ships are built so that their best weapons bear in a couple of arcs so that they can create an overwhelming amount of fire in a particular sector. Many large ships include a number of small weapons that can fire into the zero arc, so that fighters and missiles in the same hex as the ship itself can be attacked.
Zero-port and zero-starboard are simply the same hex as the
firing ship. Not every weapon can hit extremely close targets due to masking by the ship's structure, inability to train quickly enough on rapidly changing target angles, and so on. When a ship moves into the same hex as another vessel, the moving ship

  Obviously, not every step is necessary in every battle. Jusctan declare whether it's in the zero-port or zero-starboard firing skip steps that aren't needed in the current game round orarc of the nonmoving ship. The moving ship can declare that any
scenario.	one of its firing arcs faces the stationary ship.


  Example:A destroyer moves into the same hex that an- en emy battleship occupies (the battleship moved earlier in the round). The commander of the destroyer declares that his ship is located in the battleship's zero-port arc. He als-o de clares that the battleship is in the destroyer's forward arc of fire, since he intends to torpedo it in just a moment.

Decoys	13


Range
  Over the great distances of a typical space battle, energy weapons slowly disperse and the smallest inaccuracy in a projectile creates a miss of thousands of kilometers. Range is
counted in hexes from the firing ship to the target, not c-ount+3 step penalty to the attack roll unless the target is direct- ing the hex the firing ship is in (that would be a range of 0).ly ahead.
If you're playing with miniatures, you'll find that some

miniatures actually take up two or three hexes on a map sheet. The ship itself would be microscopic if the miniature

Successful Attacks

was scaled correctly to the map, so use the highest mast oAr n attack roll results in one of four possible results: a failure, tower on the miniature as the hex the ship is actually -locator a hit of Ordinary, Good, or Amazing quality. Each weapon

ed in.


Attack Rolls

has a listed damage range for each type of hit. For example, a laser cannon inflicts d4 stun points on an Ordinary hit, d4 wound points on a Good hit, and d4+2 wound points on an Amazing hit.

An attack roll is a normal crew check. Like other checks, it Defensive screens may absorb damage or the targe-t's ar
begins at a bonus of +d0. An attack roll is modified by themor can block it. In addition to causing some amount of-dam

following conditions:
• Weapon base accuracy
• Target size modifier
• Range modifier
• Fire control modifier
• Target defenses
• Fixed mount penalty (+3 steps if not on direct line)
Weapon accuracyis a property of the weapon itself.

age points, successful hits may knock out key systems on the target or reduce its capabilities. See "Damage" for mo-re in formation.

Launched  Weapons
Missiles and bombs attack much like other weapons, with one extra step: getting there.
Missiles move during the movement phase, acting like

Record it on your ship record sheet under the weapo-n desmall and maneuverable ships (see the movement rules for
scription.	details). If a missile ends its movement in the same hex as its
  Target size modifieirs a characteristic of the ship, noted on target, it may roll an attack in the fire phase. However,- mis your ship record sheet. Small ships are harder to hit than bigsile attacks are the last step in the fire phase, so it's possible

ships.
Missiles have a +4 step target size modi.fier
Range modifiedr epends on the weapon's range chara-cter

for the target to shoot down an attacking missile with a last- second round of defensive fire.
Bombsmust be carried to the hex in which they will be

istics. A weapon may have a range of 2/4/8 hexes, ind-icat employed. In other words, the bomber must end its m- ove

ing that a shot of ?02 hexes is Short range,?34 hexes is Medium range, and ?58 hexes is Long range.
Medium range attacks suffer a +1 step pen.alty Long range attacks suffer a +2 step pen.alty
Fire controlreflects the power of the attacking ship's c-om

ment in the same hex as the target to make an attack roll in the fire phase. Bombs can't be hit by defensive fire, b-ut de fensive fire can shoot down the bomber before it executes its bombing attack.
Any ship can drop bombs on a stationary target such as a

puters and fire control systems. Mark it on your ship recordplanet or base, but only ships of Maneuverability Class IV or
sheet.	better can drop bombs on enemy ships, and even then the
  Target defensesaccount for defensive systems that maketarget must have a Maneuverability Class lower than the the ship harder to hit-jammers, deflection inducers, chaffb,ombe.r
and so on These should be described on the ship record

sheet of the target vessel.
The fixed mount penalty means that a weapon housed in

DAMAGE

a fixed mount suffers a +3 step penalty to any attacks thatAll ships possess a damage track, which is composed of four are not along a direct line of hexes. A weapon in a fixeddifferent components: stun (s), wound (c), mortal (m), and mount forward can fire into the forward arc, but suffers acritical (e) damage. (This parallels the damage trackAfLo-r

of energy screens. These affect the actual damage inflicted by a successful attack. Defenses of the second type incluMde, EC chaff, or deflection inducers-gravitic shields that deflect in- coming fire. These defenses affect the success or failure of the attack by adding step modifiers to the firing ship's attack roll.

Armor
A ship protected by armor has an armor rating. This is the number of points of incoming damage the armor blocks. For example, a ship is struck for 9 points of mortal damage. If the ship is equipped with heavy cerametal armor, the armor stops d8 points of damage. On a roll of 6, the armor would stop 6 points of damage, leaving 3 points of mortal damage to be marked off on the ship's damage track.
	    Important:The   secondary   damage   of   the   attack   is   based TERNITYcharacters and vehicles.) If it bothers you to think ofon the original damage roll, before armor reduces the- pri the damage track this way, just consider them to be su-perfimary damage. In the example above, a hit for 9 mortal points
cial, moderate, major, and extreme damage instead.	inflicts 5 wound points and 5 stun points, even though the
  If a ship fires successfully on a target, it inflicts a range ofship's armor reduces the mortal damage from 9 points to 3 damage based on the weapon used and the degree o-f sucpoints.
cess. For example, a plasma missile inflicts d6+3 wound

points on an Ordinary success, d8+3 wound points on a Good success, and d6+2 mortal points on an Amazing- suc

Screens

cess. Refer to your ship record sheet for damage figures. Some ships may possess energy screens or shields that ab-
  Each track of damage is sometimes referred to as a g.radesorb damage. Damage is always downgraded or upgraded For instance, the plasma missile inflicts d8+3 points of -dam for attacker firepower versus defender toughness (see the age on a Good hit, and the grade of the damage is woundfollowing section) before the effects of screens, shields, and

damage.


Secondary  Damage

conventional armor are applied.
  Deflection inducers and displacers simply add a step penalty to the firing ship's attack roll. They tend to make at- tacks miss, but don't really attenuate the energy of the at-

When a weapon strikes a ship, it inflicts some amount oftack (other than the fact that attack penalties usually result stun, wound, mortal, or critical damage points. This -is rein hits of lower quality and less damage potential).
ferred to as the weapon's primary damage. For example, an Particle screens add d4 (low impact and high impact) or
Amazing hit with a boson gun inflicts 5d6 points of mortald6 points (energy) to a ship's armor rating. This is totaled
damage (an average of about 18 points).	with the target's normal armor roll, so if a ship has ceram-
  In addition, all hits automatically inflict secondary damageetal armor (d8 versus energy) and a particle screen, its ar- in each lesser grade equal to half the amount of primarymor value is d6 + d8, or 2 to 14 points. Particle screens damage (round down). In the case of the boson gun th-at inhave no effect on secondary damage, just like normal ar- flicts 17 points of mortal damage, the target also sustain-s secmor.
ondary damage of 8 wound points and 8 stun points.	Ablative shields work differently. An ablative shield has
  Secondary damage is not blocked by the target's armor, soa protective value based on the total shield point capacity of a heavily armored ship might stop all of the primary damagethe ship's capacitors. For example, a destroyer might have of a big attack, but still sustain some amount of secondarycapacitors capable of absorbing 50 shield points of dam- damage. Even if a battleship's armor stops the wound orage. One stun point of damage equals one shield point; mortal damage of a missile hit, some surface structuresm, ore dangerous grades of damage fill the ship's capacitors power relays, and hull systems will be affected by the strike;as shown below:
secondary damage represents these collateral effects of a

major weapon strike.

Armor and Screens
Warships protect themselves with two basic forms of defens- es: systems that absorb or negate the effects of the attack and systems that make it less likely that an attack will be on-tar- get. Defenses of the first type include armor and some kinds

Table 1-2: Ablative Shields
Damage	Shield
Grade	Points
1 Stun	1 point
1 Wound	2 points
1 Mortal	3 points
1 Critical	5 points

  Note that upgrading or downgrading effects for fire-tal hits become wounds, wounds become stuns, and stuns are power versus toughness take place before the amount onf egated entirely. If the weapon's firepower falls short by two shield points taken up by an attack is calculated. If theclasses, damage inflicted drops by two grades: mortals to primary damage of the attack is entirely absorbed, therestun, and wound or stun disappear enti.rely
is no secondary damage and no system damage. If the at-

tack is partially absorbed by a failing shield, the "leftover" damage creates secondary damage and may cause sys- tem damage.
  Typically, a ship fitted with an ablative shield will be impervious to enemy fire for a couple of rounds at the be- ginning of the battle, but then the shield will fail as the ship's capacitors fill.

Damage  Type

Table 1-3: Downgrading
Damage	Number of Grades
Grade	One	Two	Three
Stun	None	None	None
Wound	Stun	None	None
Mortal	Wound	Stun	None
Critical	Mortal	Wound	Stun	
Example: A destroyer fires a fusion laser (a medium

                                               weapon) at a battleship (a heavy target) and inflicts 6 wound In addition to the number of points and the grade of dam-points. Since the laser's firepower falls one class short of the age inflicted by an attack, weapons are characterized bytarget's toughness, the damage becomes 6 stun points. Then, what type of damage they inflict: low impact (LI), high im- the battleship may roll its armor vs. energy attacks to negate pact (HI), or energy (En). Low impact weapons strike likesome or all of this stun damage.
physical blows, collisions, or blasts. High impact weapons

penetrate the target. Energy attacks both penetrate and ir- radiate, heat, or vaporize the target.

Upgrading

  Damage type is important because different types of ar-If a weapon's firepower exceeds the target's toughness, all mor and defensive devices work better against some at-damage increases by one grade. Stuns become wounds, tacks than others. For example, light crystallis armor is de-wounds become mortals, mortals become compartment- dam signed to handle energy weapons, so its En value is d6+2a. ge, and compartment damage dice are doubled. If th-e fire Howeve,r it's not as good against high impact attacks, so itspower is two classes over the target's toughness, dama-ge in
HI value is only d6.	creases by two grades; three classes over, three grades.


Firepo w er and  Toughness


Damage.

Table 1-4: Upgrading
Excess of Firepower

In addition to their damage, range, and accuracy char-acter istics, all weapons are rated for firepow. Feirrepower roug-h

Grade	One	Two	Three
Stun	Wound Mortal	Critical

ly measures how the weapon affects targets of different sizes. Wound	 Mortal Critical	2x Crit It incorporates penetration, destructive potential, and general Mortal	Critical 2x Crit	 3x Crit

potential for mayhem. Firepower ratings correspond to ship classes: small craft, light, medium, heavy, and super-h.eavy Toughnessmeasures how large, heavily compartmented

Critical	2x Crit 3x Crit	4x Crit

Critical damage upgrades a little differently. For one step,

ships can stand up to weapons fire. It's not just armor-it'simply double the critical damage rolled. For two, triple it, and mostly about size. Toughness is based on the class of thefor three, quadruple it. For example, if a zero bore (super-
ship and whether or not the design is a military huollu.gTh-	heavy firepower) hits a battleship (heavy toughness) for 11
ness grades include small craft, light, medium, heavy, andcritical points, the damage upgrades to 22 critical points. This

super-heav.y
Whenever a weapon strikes a ship, compare the fire-pow

will prove to be lethal quite frequen.tly
Example:The battleship returns fire with its primary -bat

er of the weapon to the toughness of the target. High t-oughtery, a heavy matter beam (heavy). It scores a hit inflicting 7 ness targets may shrug off low firepower weapons, whilemortal points. However, since the destroyer is only a ligh- t tar
high firepower weapons devastate low toughness targets. get, these upgrade one step to criticals, and then a second
• If firepower equals toughness, there is no special effect.time to double the number of criticals-14 in this case. Don't
• If toughness exceeds firepower, the weapon's damagemess with battleships.
downgrade.s

• If firepower exceeds toughness, the weapon's damage upgrades.

Effects of Damage
A ship is shakenwhen all the boxes in its stun track are

Downgrading

marked off, disabledwhen all the boxes in its wound track are checked off, cripplewdhen all boxes in its mortal track

If a weapon's firepower falls short of the target's toughnessare checked off, and destroyewdhen all boxes in its critical by one class, all damage inflicted drops by one grade.- Mortrack are checked off.

Shaken

damage rating but less than twice that number, the sh-ip re mains more or less in one piece-a lifeless derelict hurtling

When all of a ship's stun boxes are checked off, the shipthisrough space, continuing on its last course and speed. shaken. Minor systems failures, ionizing damage, and f-luctu If the damage exceeds twice the derelict's critical damage ations in system operations generally reduce a ship's -effercating, the wreck immediately breaks up or explodes. Remove tiveness in battle. Shaken ships suffer the following penaltiethse: miniature from the map.
• All crew checks suffer a +1 step pena. lty

• The ship remains shaken until it repairs at least 1 stun point. Excess stun damage that strikes a ship with no stun

Repairs

boxes left is marked off the wound track at a 2-for-1 ratAet the end of a round, any ship with damage may attempt a (two stun points become one point of wound damage).repair check. A repair check is a normal crew check, m- odi
fied by any damage control systems the damaged ship- pos

Disabled

sesses. A repair check can do the following:
• Restore 1, 2, or 3 lost stun points for an Ordinary, Good,

A ship is disabled when all of its wound points have been lost or Amazing success.
to damage. Important systems are no longer working o- r re•	Restore 1, 2, or 3 wound points for an Ordinary, Good,

quire constant attention to compensate for damage, portions of the ship's interior have been holed to space, and the overall integrity of the hull is failing. A disabled ship suffers th-e fol

or Amazing success. Only ships equipped with repair bots or a nanite repair array can attempt this type o-f re pair check.

lowing penalties:
• All crew checks suffer a +2 step pena. lty
• The ship's Maneuverability Class drops by one point.
• 
Restore 1, 2, or 3 mortal points for an Ordinary, Good, or
Amazing success. Only ships equipped with a nani-te re pair array can attempt this repair check.

• Enemies firing on the disabled ship gain a -1 step bonus
to their attack rolls.


Ship Class and Repair Checks

  The ship remains disabled until it repairs at least one poiSnmt all ships don't carry enough crewmen to both fight a-nd at of wound damage. Excess wound damage that penetrates tehme pt repairs at the same time.
ship's armor when it has no wound boxes left rolls into-mor Small craftcannot attempt a repair check unless they either

tal damage at a 2-for-1 rate.

Crippled

coasted (made no maneuvers or speed changes) or did not fire any weapons in this game round.
  Lightand mediumships may attempt one repair check per round, regardless of what other actions they take in that

A crippled ship has lost all boxes on its mortal damage tracrko.und.
Most systems can function only through heroic efforts andHeavyships may attempt two repair checks per round. jury-rigging on the part of the crew. Extensive portions of theSuper-heavyships may attempt three repair checks per hull have been demolished, and most of the ship's interiorriosund.
open to vacuum. A crippled ship suffers the following p-enal

ties:
• All crew checks suffer a +3 step pena. lty

Repair Check Limitations

• The ship's Maneuverability Class drops by two points. If a ship is capable of performing multiple repair checks in the
• Enemies firing on the crippled ship gain a -2 step bonussame round, no type of damage can receive more than one

to their attack rolls.

repair attempt per round. For example, a fortress ship with three repair checks per round couldn't use all three to correct

  In almost all cases, a ship cannot repair lost points of-mowr ound damage. One check could be used for stun damage, tal damage during the course of a space battle. This meaonnse for wound damage, and the last one for mortal damage that a ship crippled in a battle remains crippled for the rest (oif the ship possessed systems that allow it to correct mortal the fight. However, some special damage control systems mdaaymage).
make it possible for mortal damage to be repaired in a- mat

ter of rounds. If a crippled ship regains at least 1 box of-mor tal damage, it is no longer crippled. Excess mortal damage

THE BATTLEGROUND

that strikes a ship with no mortal damage boxes remaininSgince it's nearly impossible to bring a fast-moving ship t-o bat

becomes critical damage, at a 2-for-1 rate.

Destr oyed

tle, most space battles take place in the vicinity of planets or bases where one side or the other has an interest. Raids, blockades, and invasions are far more common than open- space encounters. While each hex on the battle mat -is ex

A ship is destroyed outright when it loses all of its criticatrlemely large (1,000 kilometers across), there are still some damage boxes. If the damage is more than the ship's critictearlrain features that can affect the way a battle develops.

Planets
  
High Orbit:A ship within three hexes of a planet mark- er but not actually on the planet marker is in high orbit. If

When a scenario takes place in the vicinity of a planet, thethe ship reduces its speed to 0, it can begin to orbit the planet is far and away the dominant feature on the moapr . F planet, or it can drop to low orbit in the following game the sake of convenience, we'll assume that planets come inround.
three sizes: small, medium, and gas giant.	Ships orbiting in high orbit move along the orbital path
  Smallplanets are 5,000 kilometers in diameter (five hex-at a rate of one hex per twenty rounds. You can treat them es). Planets such as Mars, Mercury, or Pluto might be repa- s motionless for game play. Ships in high orbit can fire on resented by small planets. It's not precise, but it's a reason(-or be fired on by) any enemy within range.
able approximation for game play.	Most orbital stations are located in high orbit, where
  Mediumplanets are 9,000 kilometers in diameter (nine their weapons can cover a broad portion of the planet's sur- hexes). This is a little small for representing Earth-sizedface.
planets, but it's good enough for game play.

  Gas giants may be 50,000 to 150,000 kilometers (or more!) in diameter. For the sake of convenience, you can in-

Planets and Fir e

dicate the presence of a gas giant by simply marking aShips can trace a line of fire "over" a planet, as long as the "wall" (give it a slight curve if you like) across one side orline of attack doesn't have to pass more than one hex corner of the map sheet. With a radius of 25 hexes, the cir-"deep" on the planet marker. In other words, every hex of cumference of a gas giant would be more than 150 hexes!a planet blocks fire, except for the outermost hexes. If nec- Indicating a 20- or 30-hex long arc of the gas giant's sur-essary, use a string or a straight-edge of some kind to face is about the best you can do for most tabletop gamesd.raw a line of sight from the "high point" of the firing ship
to the "high point" of the target. If the line of sight crosses

Planets and Mo vement

any portion of a hex that blocks fire, the target is obscured by the planet and can't be attacked from the firing ship's

Ships that move adjacent to a planet or onto the planeltocation. (Note that missiles can still be launched and ma- marker (see "Low Orbit," below) may use the gravitationanl euvered to strike at a target that can't be hit by beams or influence of planet to immediately change their heading bytorpedoes.)
60 degrees (one hex side) in the direction of the planet. This Ships that have landed can be attacked only by enemy
is not mandatory; even a ship with an acceleration of onlyships that assume a high or low orbit. 1 hex per round generates hundreds of G's, and can easily

compensate for the relatively weak gravity field of a plan- et.

Orbital Bombardment

Beyond the "slingshot" move, planets have four distinctTo conduct an orbital bombardment, the attacking ship must
regions for movement purposes.	assume a low or high orbit over the specified hex of the tar-
  Impact Zone:The center hex of a small planet, central get planet and remain there for at least one fire phase. three hexes of a medium planet, or any hex more than one

hex "deep" in a gas giant is an impact zone. Any ship that enters an impact zone hex at a speed greater than 1 is de-

Asteroids and Moons

stroyed. A ship in the impact zone at a speed of 1 or lessAsteroids or small moons are one-hex bodies. They cannot
preparing to land.	provide a gravitational slingshot, since they're just too small
Low Orbit:If a ship moves onto a planet marker but to have any appreciable gravity field.
doesn't enter the impact zone, it's considered to be in low A ship that moves into the same hex as an asteroid or orbit. If the ship reduces its speed to 0, it can begin to orbimt oon with a speed of 1 or less may choose to land on the
the planet or it can land in the following game round.	asteroid (there's no low orbit or high orbit for a body this
  Ships orbiting in low orbit move along the orbital path atsmall, at least in game terms). A ship that has landed on an a rate of one hex per ten rounds. (The orbital path is theasteroid may fire or be fired upon normally, but enemy fire ring of hexes that circles the planet at the ship's current diss- uffers a +2 step penalty due to the masking effect of the tance.) This is a gross simplification of orbital mechanicst,argets' surroundings.
but it works for game play. Ships in low orbit can fire on or  An asteroid or moon blocks fire, if the line of sight from
be fired on by any enemy within range.	the firing ship to the target passes through any portion of
Landed:A ship can land only by spending the previous the hex the asteroid is located in.
round in low orbit. A landed ship can be fired upon only by Impact ZoneAn:	asteroid or moon functions as an impact
(or fire on) enemy ships in low or high orbit.	zone only if a ship moves onto the marker with a Maneu-
In the case of a gas giant, "landing" means that the shipverability Class and acceleration rating of 0s.uaUlly, this
is sinking a little deeper into the atmosphere. Under no cir-happens only after a ship has suffered severe battle dam- cumstances can any ship move more than one hex deepage.
into a gas giant.

Rings and Debris Fields	High-Speed Bomb Runs
The classic asteroid belt as depicted in the movies is fairlyIt takes some careful maneuvering to execute a bombi-ng at misleading-in our own asteroid belt, tumbling boulders andtack. It's extremely useful to keep your fighter squadrons 10 plummeting planetoids are thousands of kilometers apar t,o 15 hexes from the target you want to bomb, while k- eep and a pilot would never have to weave in and out of theming their speed at about the same value. Then, when you see like a crazed taxi driver on the Long Island Expressway.a good opportunity, have your fighter squadrons close-to at Howeve,r local areas may have a much higher concentra-tack distance in a single move. You want your fighter tion of small debris-ice crystals, pebbles, dust, and so on-squadrons to be in the enemy's zero arc or out of range of
than normal interplanetary space.	his weaponry altogether; getting caught at a range of 4 or 5
  Rings and debris fields are found near planets. A planethexes is death for most fighter squadrons. or asteroid with a debris field is surrounded by a "haze" of

debris one hex wide. A gas giant may be surrounded by a band of debris 1d4 hexes wide, paralleling the planet's sur-

Concentr ated Fir e

face at a distance of 1d8 hexes.	Okay, so it's not sporting, but consider having a number of
  Debris fields and rings add a +2 step penalty to anyyour ships concentrate fire on a single enemy target to- crip weapon fire that passes into or through at least one hex opf le or destroy it as quickly as possible. It's much better to kill

the field.



Moving Through Debris

a couple of ships fast to reduce the firepower pointed at your own fleet than to gradually wear away at every ship in the enemy fleet.

Debris fields can also be dangerous to moving shiposr. F each point of speed a ship currently has, it suffers 1d4-1

Crossing the "T"

points of stun damage (low impact) for entering a ring orWhen possible, use the edge to maneuver your ships into the debris hex, to a maximum of 10d4-10 stun points. If theleast dangerous enemy firing arcs you can reach. If you ship has no kind of deflection inducer, particle screen, orknow that an enemy cruiser has a great concentration o-f fire ablative shield, the damage increases to 1d4-1 woundpower forward, look at where your ships are in relation to points per point of speed. The firepower of the attack isthe enemy's forward firing arc and get out of Dodge.

equal to the size of the moving ship.

TACTICS
  
If you can't escape a powerful concentration of enemy fire, you can instead deliberately group as many of your ships as possible so as to take advantage of their weapon arc. Th- e en emy will smear one of your ships, but the others won't b-e sit

Theres' a lot going on in these combat rules, and the besting in firing arcs where enemy weapons have nothing- bet way to fight a ship effectively isn't always apparent. Hereter to do but shoot at them.
are some good tactics you may want to consider using in

your game.

Missile Satur  ation

The Range Game
Determine if a short, medium, or long range between you and your enemy is good for you or good for her. For e-xam

If you think it's going to take ten missile hits to cripple orple, a battleship fighting several destroyers should try to destroy an enemy ship, don't fire one or two missiles astand off at long range and hope for lucky hits with its main round for several rounds. If you can, launch all ten at onceb. atteries. If the destroyers can't return fire because the range Dealing with one or two incoming missiles is a simple mat-is too long, sooner or later the battleship is going to a-nnihi ter for any defensive system, but a large flight of missileslate them. Similarly, if you have close-range weapons, you can "saturate" the enemy defenses and guarantee thawt ant to close the distance fast and get into a knife-fight with

some missiles will slip through and score hits.

your enemy. Loitering out in open space where she can- clob ber you and you can't hit her is not a good plan.

CHAPTER 2: ADVANCED COMBAT
In this chapter, we'll present a number of optional rules sets• +3 step penalty if no enemy ships are currently held by

that can be added on to the rulesCinhapter 1: Basic Combat
to customize your space combat game. Each set of rules yo•u
add increases the complexity and the time required to play out a ship-to-ship battle, but provides an additional level of detail for the game.
  The advanced rules include an expanded Sequence of Play, Power phase, sensor phase, expanded maneuvering rules,

successful sensor checks.
?3 step bonus if the ship performed a successful Break maneuver in the preceding round (see Movement) and there are no other friendly ships in p.lay

POWER

fire modes for shipboard weapons, a detailed damage systemM, ost ships are built with sufficient power generation -to si special orders, and rules for ships fighting in the Fusion Agemultaneously run all combat-critical systems. However-, bat or Matter Age. None of the rules contradict each other, but yotule damage to power-stingy ship designs may make it n-eces may want to try them out one or two at a time instead ofsary for the ship commander to decide from round to round

wrestling with all the detailed rules systems at once. In order of detail, we recommend the following:
a. Fire Modes
b. System Damage
c. Maneuver Checks
d. Sensor Checks
e. Power Distribution
f. Varying game scales

SEQUENCE OF PLAY

which systems will receive pow.er
  You need to assign power points only if you wish to change which systems the ship is actually powering, or if damage to the ship's power plant has reduced the total-num ber of power points available. With the exception of engines, there's no such thing as partial power-a system is either powered or it isn't (although you can save power points for use in later rounds by accumulating power in weapons that aren't fired this round). For engines, you only need to spend power for the amount of acceleration you want to use in the movement phase.

The expanded rules in the advanced combat system ad-d sev List power costs for each weapon, sensor, defense, and
eral steps to the sequence of play. The advanced sequence oefngine system on your ship record sheet. You may find it

play is as follows:

Edge Phase Power Phase Sensor Phase Movement Phase
a. Capital Ships
b. Medium and Light Ships
c. Small Craft
d. Antiship Missiles
e. Counter-missile Missiles
     f. Mine attacks Fire Phase
a. Beams and Projectiles
b. Torpedoes and Special
c. Missile Attacks
     d. Bomb Attacks Launch Phase
Repair Phase Special Orders

EDGE PHASE

useful to record power distribution as well.

Accumulating P ow er
Some heavy weapon systems require an enormous amount of power-so much power that a ship can't muster all of the energy needed to fire the weapon. Power points can be stored or accumulated in a weapon system until it's ready for use.
  For example, let's say that a destroyer is built around a heavy matter beam-an oversized weapon for a dest.royer The matter beam requires 24 points of power to fire. If the destroyer generates 40 points of power and the captain- allo cates 32 points to other systems this round, he has 8 points to spare, which he can pour into the big gun. The heavy- mat ter beam has received 8 of the 24 points it needs to fire, so it needs only 16 to power up the heavy matter beam in any subsequent round.

Weapons Hot
Since ships can store extra power in the power banks of their major weapons systems, you can assume that all ship-s be

Edge is determined as described in the basic rules-each roungdi,n a battle with "weapons hot." Hot weapons are powered to
both commanders make crew checks (oarctTics-space tactics	within 1 point of firing. In other words, the first time a ship
skill checks, if a player character is one of the commanders)f.ires a weapon during combat, it takes only 1 power point-
The side that achieves the greatest success wins the edge.	regardless of the size of the weapon or its normal pow-er de
In addition to the edge check modifiers, you may add themands.
following modifiers:	This rule assumes that the ship has a few minutes before

the shooting starts to stack power into its weapon accu-mula tors. In some cases, a surprise attack may catch a fleet with its weapons cold. Instead of firing the first volley for a measly 1 power point per weapon, a ship with cold weapons must pay the full cost to power its weapons and fire.
  Note that this makes it possible for ships built around a high-power weapon to deliver one good punch fast-but then it might take a number of rounds to accumulate power for the next shot of the ship's big gun.

SENSORS
Space is big, and ships are small. Sometimes the be-st de fense for a starship commander is hiding in plain sight. A ship that hasn't been detected can't be hit.

Tactical Datalinks







Tracking

  Ships that are on the map sheet during a battle are- conOnce a contact has been detected and reclassified as a target, sidered to be contac.tCsontacts may not be attacked until they no more sensor checks are necessary-the ship that detected have been successfully localized by a sensor check (a crewthe contact automatically tracks the contact in each s-ubse

check or a System Operation-sensosrksill check) and r-e classified as targe.ts

Contacts

quent round, unless something makes the detecting ship drop track. The following conditions may break a detection:
• The detecting ship is reduced to 0 stun, wound, mortal,
or compartment points;
• The detecting ship suffers a hit that knocks out the- sen

For ease of play, there are no special rules for hidden move-	sor used to acquire the target;
ment or movement plots iWn arships.All ships involved in a  •	The target moves into a sensor shadow of the detecting

battle are contacts. You can assume that telltale radio emis- sions, heat signatures, or even visual observation of stars oc•- cluded by a ship's passage provide commanders with a rough

ship.
The detecting ship fails to provide power to the sensor used to acquire the target.

idea of where the enemy is. The miniature or counter you use•	The target moves beyond the sensor's maximum range.
to mark your ship's location on the map represents this level

of general sensor information available to the enemy.

Targets
   
Tracks are dropped at the end of the phase in which the triggering event occurs, regardless of the current phase of the round. For example, if a ship suffers damage that knocks out a sensor in the fire phase, the target re-

Firing solutions are a different story. Before a ship can -be atverts to a contact at the end of the phase. Fire against the

tacked, it must first be detectebdy means of a successful s-en sor check.

target in the current phase is resolved, but no further fire is possible until the contact is re-acquired as a target.

  Each ship may attempt one sensor check per sensor per enemy ship in range. For instance, if a destroyer has three sensor systems and there are two contacts in range, the- play


Active and Passiv  e

er controlling the destroyer rolls three checks against eachSensors fall into one of two general categories: active and target-one for each sensor system. The following modifierpsassive. Active sensors generate some kind of energy signal

apply:

Condition	Modifier
Long range	+3 steps
Medium range	+1 step
Short range	 +0 Range 1 hex or less	-3 steps Contact size	 by ship
Contact fired in	-3 steps preceding round

and transmit it, evaluating the target based on how the- con tact reflects the signal. Active sensors are very good fo-r tar geting, but they give away the originating ship's position, and they can be detected at a greater distance than they ca- n de tect targets.
  Passive sensors simply detect energy emissions gener- ated by the target itself. The target's exact range and lo- cation are a matter of interpretation and data processing, so most passive sensors aren't as good at targeting as ac- tive sensors. However, passive sensors do not give away the sensing ship's location, since no energy is being gen-

Many sensors have specific advantages or disadvantagese.rated and transmitted at the target. Passive sensors can
For example, ships equipped with EM detectors gain a -2usually detect a ship using active sensors at a greater dis- step bonus to sensor checks against contacts that are usintgance than the active ship can detect the passive ship at.
active radar systems.	The decision of whether to go active or stay passive can

have a lot of tactical significance. Two common senso-r sys tems-the EM detector and the CE passive scan-con-fer sig nificant bonuses to the sensor check if used against a target that has "gone activ"e.

Acceler ation and Maneuver Checks


Battle Damage Assessment

Each point of acceleration "left over" after the ship adjusts its speed for the round adds a -1 step bonus to the maneuver check (or skill check). If the destroyer in the precedin-g ex

One of the most critical uses of sensor data in the courseample had two points of acceleration unused in the current of a space battle is battle damage assessment-the evalup-hase, the pilot would roll his maneuver check with a -2 step ation of damaged enemies to determine if they need to bebonus.
attacked again. Determining whether an enemy battleship

has had all of its power knocked out by a hail of matter cannon fire may be crucial to a commander's decision on

Limits of Maneuvering	

whether to stay and fight or flee the scene.	A ship can't attempt maneuver checks on consecutive
  Battle damage assessment requires careful study ofrounds. Since a maneuver check represents the pilot's efforts fleeting images and returns. Many sensor systems simplyto push the ship to its maximum performance, it takes at least don't provide the right kind of data. The following sensorone round to recover from the stresses on both machinery

systems are useful for battle damage assessment:
• Hi-res video

and personnel before another extreme maneuver can -be at tempted.

• Probe and advanced probe (if fitted with video sys-

tems)
• Spectroanalyzer (+2 step penalty to battle damage

Jinking

assessment checks)
• CE passive scan

Instead of using a maneuver check to increase its m-aneu verability, a ship can instead use a maneuver check to "jink," making itself harder to hit. An Ordinary, Good, or Amazing

  On a successful sensor check, the player whose ship isresult on the maneuver check adds a +1, +2, or +3 step scanning for battle damage may examine the target shippenalty to any incoming enemy fire, missile attacks, or bomb record sheet and make a note of the amount of damageattacks in the following fire phase.
the ship has suffered, which systems are knocked out, and  Just like a normal maneuver check, unused acceleration

so on.


MOVEMENT

in the current round adds a -1 step bonus per point left over to the maneuver check. In addition, the ship's size modifier is reversed and added to the pilot's skill check. For example, a fighter has a +3 step size modifier for targeting, but thi-s be

The movement rules are expanded by the addition of th-e macomes a -3 step bonus for jinking attempts. neuver check-a type of crew check that allows a ship-to ex

ceed its normal performance, take evasive action, or seize the initiative in a limited combat. In addition, these rul-es in

Mine Attacks

troduce an insidious new threat for the warship commanderI:f a ship or missile passes through a hex in which enemy

the mine.


Maneuver Checks

mines are present, the movement phase is interrupted to per- form an immediate mine attack. A ship passing through sev- eral mined hexes may have to check for mine attacks multiple times in the same move. Friendly mines never endanger ships.

All ships are assigned a Maneuverability Class based on the size and hull type. However, a ship may attempt a crew check (or Vehicle Opssp-acecraftskill check on the part of the character at the helm) to increase its Maneu- verability Class by 1, 2, or 3 for an Ordinary, Good, or Amazing success.
  For example, a destroyer has a base Maneuverability Class 3. If it's traveling at a speed of 9, its MC is reduced by two points to MC 1. Under normal circumstances, the ship is limited to one maneuver per round. If the helms- man rolls an Ordinary success on the check, the destroy- er's Maneuverability Class is increased to 2, allowing it to perform one more maneuver this round than it would nor- mally due to its high speed.

Mining a hex requires at least one pattern of ten mines.
Facing

Multiple patterns may be laid to create a denser and more dangerous minefield. For each mined hex, the moving ship

Clearing Mines

must roll a crew check (oraTctics-space tacticsskill check by the commanding officer) and consult the table below:
Table 2-1: Mine Attacks
No. of	Check Result Patterns M	O	G	A
11---221--3211-43211
Getting rid of a mine pattern is easy, as long as a ship has time to do so. During each special orders phase spent- adja cent to the minefield, the warship may attempt a sensor check to detect one, two, or three mines. The mines may then be detonated by one weapon hit apiece. A mine pattern-is de feated if it is reduced to four mines or less.

ATTACK PHASE
In this chapter, we'll introduce three new concepts for t-he at tack roll: targeting sensors, weapon fire modes, and missile

  The result is the number of mine attacks the moving shipsalvoes and flights. sustains in that hex. For example, a cruiser moving through

a hex with three mine patterns rolls an Ordinary success on a crew check, so it suffers one mine attack in that hex. A

Weapons and Sensors

mine attack is not an automatic hit; the opposing playerBefore a warship can fire on an enemy vessel, it must obtain simply gets a chance to make a normal attack roll for thea successful sensor check. The simple presence of the- ene mine, taking into account its warhead, guidance system, thme y miniature or marker represents a contact, a set of weak
target size, and so on.	signatures and telltale emissions that gives away thesship'
  The effects of a mine hit take place immediately. A shipgeneral location. This isn't good enough for a firing solution. destroyed by a mine halfway through its move obviouslyThe firing ship can fire only at targets that have been d-etect doesn't finish its movement for the round. Similarly, a shiped with a successful sensor check in a previous sensor that suffers mine damage that knocks out all of its powerphase.

can't make any maneuvers after it hits the mine.

Laying Mines
  
It is possible to launch missiles at a contact in the hope that the missiles' seeker heads will successfully detect the contact when the missile reaches the enemy ship. But a- mis sile that doesn't have a detected target to attack simply flies

A ship carrying mines in an ordnance cell, missile rack, orpast without detonating. similar launcher places mines in the launch phase. The

mines can be placed in any hex adjacent to the ship, as well as the hex it's currently located in. Since it takes ten mines

Pow er

to make a mine pattern, a ship that lays less than ten minesA weapon must be powered before it can fire, and the act of in a single launch phase may have to loiter in the same hexfiring discharges all power the weapon has stored. A -pow
for several rounds to complete its mine pattern.	ered weapon doesnh'tave to fire; the captain can hold fire
  Mines are marked on the map by a mine counter, whichand save the weapon's charge for a later attack phase if he indicates that there are telltale signs that a minefield mayso chooses.
be in that hex. Every time a ship lays a pattern of mines, it

can place a second marker on the map in a hexmitght have mined. This dummy marker should make the oppos-

Fire Modes

ing player uncertain about the actual location of the mine-Each weapon described on your ship record sheet may fire

field.



Detecting Mines

in one or more of four different modes: single-shot (F), burst (B), automatic (A), or battery (Group). If a weapon is capable of firing in multiple modes, the player may choose from round to round how the weapon will be employed.

Mines are typically designed to be small, stealthy, and hard It's impossible to combine two fire modes at the same
to detect. A ship that moves into a minefield marker is en-time. For example, four plasma cannon with burst fire -capa titled to one sensor check to determine if the marker is ability could shoot as individual weapons using burst fire real mine pattern or a dummy counter. If mines are detect-mode, or they could fire as a single four-weapon battery, but ed, the moving ship may attempt a maneuver of some kindthey can't do both at the same time.
to avoid plowing through the hex, provided it has enough

maneuverability to do so (in other words, it hasn't used all of its maneuvers this round). Otherwise, the ship must

Single Shot (Mode F)

move into or through the mined hex.

This is the easiest firing method. The weapon fires one shot. All you need to do is make one attack roll per weapon firing in single-shot mode, taking all relevant fac-

tors into consideration (range modifiers, target modifiersw, ith a cumulative one-step bonuUsp.

to four weapons can	23

fire control modifiers, and so on.).
Burst Fire (Mode B)

fire as a single battery at a single target. Each situation die modifies the same roll of the control die, yielding a different result for each gun participating in the battery fire.
Example:The Revengeis a battlecruiser armed with four

Some quick-firing weapons are capable of firing severalheavy matter beams. She fires all four at tThieger, an ene- shots in rapid succession. To represent the increased-effecmy battleship. The basic attack modifiers for Rthevenge tiveness of a burst of fire, make one attack roll with a -1 stepgive it a net modifier of +1 step to the attack. The batte-ry at bonus for burst fire. Make sure to take all other fire modifierstack is rolled at a d20 (the control die) +1d4 (the first beam), into account before rolling the attack. Burst fire is better than+d0 (the second), -d4 (the third), and -d6 (the fourth).
single-shot fire, but not all weapons are capable of firing in Assume that theRevengeneeds a 14 to hit. The d20

burst mode.

Autofire (Mode A)

comes up 15; the first d4 is a 3, the d0 is a 0, the second d4 is a 2, and the d6 is a 6.
  The results: attack rolls of 18, 15, 12, and 9. In this case, theRevengescores two misses and two Ordinary hits with its

Sometimes rate of fire is the most important weapon ch-aracbattery fire. teristic. Weapons capable of full automatic fire make a- spe
cial kind of attack roll: an autofire attack.	Each hit scored by several weapons firing as a battery
  Add up all the factors applying to the attack roll as youis a separate hit for purposes of secondary damage, abla- would for a normal single-shot attack. Then add a +1 steptive shields, hit locations, armor rolls, and so on. It's just penalty, a +2 step penalty, and a +3 step penalty. Roll alllike hitting the same target multiple times with different three situation dice with the same control die. This will giveweapons.
you three results for the same attack-with autofire, it'-s pos  All weapons firing in battery must be identical. All must
sible to score up to three hits with a single attack from onebe powered, and all must bear on the same target. Each
weapon.	battery fire attack can only target one specific target, but
All targets of a weapon's autofire attack must be in thea large ship with a number of weapons eligible for battery

same hex as each oth.er
Example:TheAugustais firing one autofire-rigged plasma

fire might form several batteries to engage two or three targets at the same time, especially if the targets happen

cannon at an enemy fighter that's too close. The weapo- n acto be located in different firing arcs. curacy, range, target size, and fire control modifiers net out

at a +d0 for a single-shot attack. Firing in full auto means that the plasma cannon will make three attack rolls at a +1,

Salvoes and P atterns

+2, and +3 step penalt.y	Attacking missiles and bombs may be grouped together to
  TheAugustaplayer rolls a d20 (the control die) and a d4, increase the chance of scoring a hit. Up to four missiles or d6, and d8 (the situation dice). Let's say that they come up abombs can attack in this way. Just like battery fire, each 6, 2, 1, and 4 respectively. These come out as attack rolls owf arhead after the first receives a cumulative -1 step bonus
8, 7, and 10. Assuming thAeugustahas an average crew  to its attack roll. See "Battery Fire" for more information.

(skill score 12), the autofire attack results in three Ordinary- quality hits.

Missile Flights

  Autofire is especially useful for close-range defense withA missile flight is an overwhelming number of missile-s de small, accurate weapons against attacking fighters and- missigned to saturate the enemy defenses and score multiple hits

siles.

Battery Fire (Mode G)

on a high-value target. A flight consists of ten salvoes, or forty individual missiles. Instead of rolling forty separa-te at tacks, you can make one attack roll using all applicable-mod ifiers against the crew score of the ship that fired the missiles.

Heavy weapons are characterized by low rates of fire andThe level of success of the attack roll dictates how many hits some inaccuracy due to the extreme ranges at which they'reof what success levels the flight scores:
used. To overcome these drawbacks, a number of heavy

weapons are grouped together and fired as a battery. B-y con centrating the fire of several heavy weapons, it becomes much more likely that at least one will score a hit.
  Battery fire works a lot like an autofire attack-except-in re verse. The base situation die for the battery fire attack -is fig ured normally, taking into account the range, fire control modifiers, the target's defenses, and so on. Theeanc,h addi- tional weapon firing in the battery adds another situation die

Table 2-2: Missile Flight Attacks
Attack	 No. of Hits of Success... Roll	O	G	A
Failure 10	6	4
Ordinary 12	7	5
Good	14	8	6
Amazing16	9	7

  For example, a missile flight attacks a battleship. Th-e atpoints left is marked off the wound track at a 2-for-1 rate tacking ship's crew has a crew check score of 14, and the(two stun points become one point of wound damage). modifiers for the attack add up to a -2 step bonus. If th- e at

tack roll (a d20 minus a d6) is an 11 and a 5, respecti,vely the total would be 6-a Good success with the missile flight.

Disabled

The battleship suffers 14 Ordinary hits, 8 Good hits, and 6A ship is disabled when all of its wound points have been lost Amazing hits from the attacking missiles. Chances asre, it'to damage. Important systems are no longer working o- r re
badly damaged or destroyed.	quire constant attention to compensate for damage, portions
Each hit scored by a missile flight requires a separateof the ship's interior have been opened to space, and the
damage roll, armor roll, damage location, and so on.	overall integrity of the hull is failing. A disabled ship suffers
If the number of missiles in the flight is reduced by d-efenthe following penalties:
sive fire, eliminate one potential hit per missile downed-. Re•	The target must roll for hit location and check for-sys
duce hits in this order: one Ordinary, one Good, one A-maz	tem damage.
ing, one Ordinary, and then repeat the cycle until you'v-e ac•	All current sensor detections are lost and must be r-e-ac

counted for all the missiles downed by defensive fire.
In the preceding example, the battleship receives twenty•-

quired to fire weapons.
All crew checks suffer a +2 step pena. lty

eight missile hits. However, if its defensive fire knocked down•	The ship may not perform any maneuver checks.
nine attacking missiles in the flight, the battleship only suffer•s	The ship's Maneuverability Class drops by one point.
nineteen missile hits. The fourteen Ordinary hits are reduced•	Enemies firing on the disabled ship gain a -1 step bonus

to nine, the eight Good hits are reduced to six, and the six Amazing hits are reduced to four. It's probably a crippling

to their attack rolls.

strike in any event, but it's better than getting pasted by the The ship remains disabled until it repairs at least one point

whole flight of missiles.

DAMAGE
A ship is more than its four damage tracks. It's also a-n ex tremely complex piece of machinery featuring many-hun

of wound damage. Excess wound damage that penetrates the ship's armor when it has no wound points left rolls into-mor tal damage at a 2-for-1 rate.

Crippled

dreds of sub-systems designed to work together. This set oAf crippled ship has lost all boxes on its mortal damage track. rules adds extra effects for marking off damage boxes, pluMs ost systems can only function through heroic efforts and system damage linked to the hit location of a major impact.jury-rigging on the part of the crew. Extensive portions of the
hull have been demolished, and most of the ship's interior is

Additional Damage Effects

open to vacuum. A crippled ship suffers the following p-enal ties:

In addition to simply marking boxes off a ship's damage•	All current sensor detections are lost and must be r-e-ac
track, damage may cause extra penalties or effects when a	quired to fire weapons.
damage track is completely crossed off. A ship is shaken•	All crew checks suffer a +3 step pena.lty
when all stun boxes are crossed off; disabbleydthe loss of	•	The ship may not perform any maneuver checks.
all wound boxes; cripplebdy the loss of all mortal boxes; and •	The ship's Maneuverability Class drops by two points.

destroyedwhen all critical boxes are gone.

Shaken
• 
Enemies firing on the crippled ship gain a -2 step bonus to their attack rolls.

In almost all cases, a ship cannot repair lost points of-mor

When all of a ship's stun boxes are checked off, the ship istal damage during the course of a space battle. This means shaken. Minor systems failures, ionizing damage, and f-luctuthat a ship crippled in a battle remains crippled for the rest ations in system operations generally reduce a ship's-effecof the fight. However, some special damage control systems tiveness in battle. Shaken ships suffer the following penaltiesm: ay make it possible for mortal damage to be repaired in a
• The target must roll a hit location and check for systemmatter of rounds. If a crippled ship regains at least one box
damage.	of mortal damage, it is no longer crippled. Excess mortal
• All current sensor detections are lost and must be r-e-acdamage that strikes a ship with no mortal damage box-es re

quired to fire weapons.
• All crew checks suffer a +1 step pena. lty

maining becomes critical damage, at a 2-for-1 rate.

• The ship may not perform any maneuver checks in the following round of combat.

Destr oy ed

                                             A ship is destroyed outright when it loses all of its critical The ship remains shaken until it repairs at least 1 stundamage boxes. If the damage is more than the ship's critical
point. Excess stun damage that strikes a ship with no stundamage rating but less than twice that number, the sh-ip re

mains more or less in one piece-a lifeless derelict hurtlingthrough. In other words, the target aspect is the firing arc the	25
  If the damage exceeds twice the derelict's critical damagerectly astern would use the "Aft" column, since the attack is rating, the wreck immediately explodes. Exploding wrec-ks incoming in through the target's aft firing arc.
flict damage on nearby ships as shown below. The p-aren The result of the hit location roll will be a zone-for example,

thetical notes the firepower of the attack:
Table 2-3: Explosion Damage
Class	Range in Hexes
of Wreck	0	1	2
Small	 d6s (S)	 ?	 ? Light	 d6s (L)	 d4 (S)	 ? Medium	 d6s (M)	d6s (L)	d4s (S) Heavy	d8s (M)	d8s (L)	d6s (S) S-heavy	 d12s (M)	 d12s (L)	 d8s (S)

the FC (or forward center) zone, the AP (aft port) zone, etc.

Order of Damage
Each zone of a warship is further divided into a hierarchy or progression of damage. The first system damage check may affect the first item on the list, the second may affect the next one, and so on. Basically, this represents the fact that systems that are close to the surface of the ship will tend to be a- ffect ed by enemy fire before systems near the ship's core, and large systems will tend to be affected before small one-s be

For example, an exploding battleship (a heavy ship) inflicts d8cause there's more of them to be hit.
stun points (medium firepower) to any ship in the same hex, d8 When a system is destroyed, it is scratched off the order
stun points (light firepower) to ships in adjacent hexes, and d6of damage for that zone. A future hit in that zone affects the

stun points (small craft firepower) to ships two hexes away.

System Damage

next item on the list. If everything in the zone has bee-n de stroyed, damage then proceeds to the next adjacent zon-e not ed on the hit location diagram on the next page.

In addition to losing points off the damage track, a ship that sustains a serious hit is likely to have a major system

How Many Checks per Hit?

knocked out or degraded-a weapon mount, an engine-, powSome hits may cause damage checks for multiple systems in er generation, and so on. In fact, a ship may be "mission-the same zone. The default answer is always at least one killed" through the loss of important systems long before itscheck against the first item in the damage o.rder

hull is destroyed outright.

Checking for System Damage
• 
One item is checked per 2 points of primary critical
damage inflicted.
• One item is checked per 3 points of primary mortal damage.

System damage is possible any time one of the following occurs•:
• The target suffers mortal or critical damage.
• The target marks off its last stun or wound box.
• The attacker achieves an Amazing success with h-er at

One item is checked for any other kind of system -dam age hit.

Note that the number of hits inflicted is determinaeftder

tack and at least 1 point of primary damage penetratesupgrading or downgrading for firepower and the effects of

the target's armo.r

armor are taken into account. For example, if a fusion beam hit inflicts 7 points of critical damage but the target's armor

  If same hit qualifies for system damage on multiple countstops 4 of these, the zone affected must check against the first (for example, a hit for mortal damage with enough se-cond3 items on the damage order. (Of course, the ship also marks ary damage to exhaust the target's wound track), it's still jusotff 3 points of critical damage, plus secondary damage of 3
one hit for purposes of system damage.	mortals, wounds, and stuns.)


Damage Checks
A damage check is a crew check made to determine whether or not a system exposed to damage continues to function or

Degraded, Knocked Out, and Destr oy ed

not.



Hit Location

Many of the following results indicate that a system is- "de graded," "knocked out," or "destroyed." Refer to the app-ropri ate entry for more information.
Degraded:Some special effects apply to this entry. Check

After a hit qualifies for system damage, the next step is-to dethe description of the result in the following section. A- de

termine what part of the target is affected. RefeTrAtBoLE2- 4: HIT LOCATION.S

graded system that is degraded a second time is knocked out. Knocked Out:The system has been knocked off-line by

  Roll the appropriate die and use the target aspect columndamage. However, it's possible to make some minor repairs that corresponds to the firing arc the attack is coming inor adjustments and get it running again, negating the result.

26
































When a system is destroyed, it is scratched off the order of damage for that zone. A future hit in that zone affects the next item on the list. If everything in the zone has been destroyed, damage then proceeds to the next adjacent zone noted on t-he hit loca tion diagrams above anTdABLE2-4: HIT LOCATIONSon the next page.

Table 2-4: Hit Locations
Target Aspect
.5hm	Forward	Port	Starboard	Aft	High/Low
Class	OiE!	Roll	 Location Roll	 Location Roll	 Location Roll	 Location Roll	 Location Small(2) d6	 1-5	F	1-3	F	1-3	F	1	F	1-3	F
6	A	4-6	A	4-6	A	5-6	A	4-6	A
Small(4) dB	1-3	F	1-2	F	1-2	F	F	1-2	F
4-6	FC	3-4	FC	3-4	FC	1-2	FC	3-4	FC
7-8	AC	5-6	AC	5-6	AC	3-5	AC	5-6	AC
                     A	7-8	 A	7-8	 A	6-8	 A		7-8	 A Light	dB	1-2	F	 1-2	F		 1-2	F		F			F 3-4		FC		3		FC		3		FC			FC	 2-3		FC
5-6	p	4-5	p	p	1-2	p	4	p
7-8	s	s	4-5	s	3-4	s	5	s
AC	6	AC	6	AC	5-6	AC	6-7	AC
A	7-8	A	7-8	A	7-8	A	B	A
ME!d. d12	1-3	F	1-2	F	1-2	F	F	1-2	F
4-5	FP	3-5	FP	FP	1	FP	3	FP
6-7	FC	6	FC	3	FC	2	FC	4-5	FC
8-9	FS	FS	4-6	FS	3	FS	6	FS
10 AP	7-9	AP	AP	4-5	AP	7	AP
11 AC	10	AC	7	AC	6-7	AC	8-9	AC
12 AS	AS	8-10	AS	8-9	AS	10	AS
A	11-12 A	11-12 A	10-12 A	11-12	A
HBavy d20	1-5	F	1-2	F	1-2	F	F	1	F
6-7 FC	3-4	FC	3-4	FC	FC	2-3	FC
8-11	FP	5-7	FP	FP	FP	4-5	FP
12-13	CF	B	CF	5	CF	CF	6-7	CF
14-17	FS	FS	6-8	FS	FS	8-9	FS
18	p	9-12	p	p	2	p	10	p
19	CA	13	CA	9	CA	3-4	CA	11-12	CA
20	s	s	10-13 s	5	s	13	s
AP	14-16 AP	AP	6-9	AP	14-15	AP
AC	17-18 AC	14-15 AC	10-11 AC	16-17	AC
AS	AS	16-18 AS	12-15 AS	18-19	AS
                          A	 19-20 A	 19-20 A	16-20 A	 20	 A SupE!r- d20	 1-3	 F		 F		 F		 F		F hBavy	4-5	FFC	2	FFC	2	FFC		FFC	2	FFC
6-8 FFP	3-4	FFP	FFP	FFP	3	FFP
9	FC	5	FC	3	FC	FC	4	FC
10-12	FFS	FFS	4-5	FFS	FFS	5	FFS
13-14	FP	6-7	FP	FP	FP	6	FP
         CF	B	 CF	6	 CF	 CF	7	 CF 15-16	FS		FS	 7-8	FS	FS	 B	FS
17-18	p	9-10	p	p	1-2	p	9	p
PC	11-12 PC	PC	PC	10	PC
CA	13	CA	9	CA	CA	11	CA
         SC	SC	 10-11	SC		SC	 12	SC 19-20	s	 s	12-13	 s	3-4	 s	13	 s
AP	14-15 AP	AP	5-6	AP	14	AP
AC	16	AC	14	AC	7	AC	15	AC
AS	AS	15-16 AS	8-9	AS	16	AS
AAP	17-18 AAP	AAP	10-12 AAP	17	AAP
AAC	19	AAC	17	AAC	13-14 AAC	18	AAC
AAS	AAS	18-19 AAS	15-17 AAS	19	AAS
A	20	A	20	A	18-20 A

In the damage control phase, the commander may have her Mortal:The command deck is destroyed. The quality of the crew attempt to repair a system that is out and bring it backship's crew is reduced by one grade-crack to veteran-, vet on-line. If a knocked-out system is knocked out a seconderan to trained, and trained to green. Green crews drop to a
time, it's destroyed.	crew check of 8. If the command deck is a cockpit, the crew
Destroyed:The system has been destroyed. It can't b-e re is killed and the vessel may not maneuver or attack.
paired in the course of this battle. Strike the item off of the Critical: As above, plus explosive decompression inflicts
damage order for this zone-it no longer counts as a p- otend8-3 points of additional wound damage to the ship a-s de

tial hit location.



System Effects

scribed under "Carg"o.
  Other command systems (flag bridges or launch towers) are knocked out on wound hits and destroyed by mortals or criticals.

The effects of damage to each type of ship system are summed up below. Note that these effects apply for pu-rpos

Computer Cor e

es of the basic game; more detailed effects are covered in thTehe ship's main computer is knocked out or lost. This- ren
next chapte.r	ders all system computers inoperable, negating the bonuses
Many of these effects call for a damage check to determinethe ship's system computers provide.
if one result occurs or another. A damage check is simply a Stun:The ship loses all computer bonuses for one round,
crew check, modified by any damage control systems thebut the systems automatically reboot during the repair phase

   ship possesses.
Accommodations

of the following round.
  Wound:The computer is knocked out. All computer bo-nus es are lost until repaired.
Mortal: The computer is knocked out and may be- de

One of the ship's bunkrooms, staterooms, cabins, or similasrtroyed. Make a damage check.

facilities is hit. Stun:No effect.
  Wound:System knocked out (damage makes it uninh-abit able until repaired).

Critical:The computer is destroyed.

Comm System

  Mortal:System knocked out and may be destroyed. MakeOne of the ship's communication systems may be knocked a damage check. On a failure, room is destroyed and e- xploout or destroyed.
sive decompression inflicts d8-3 points of additional wound Stun: Make a damage check. On a failure, the system is damage to the ship. This damage has a firepower equal toknocked out.

the ship class and ignores armor and other defenses. Critical: System destroyed. Explosive decompression-
curs as described above.

Cargo Space

Wound:The system is knocked out.
oc	Mortal:The system is knocked out and may be destroyed.
Make a damage check. Critical:The system is destroyed.

One of the ship's cargo spaces, cargo bays, or cargo holds is hit.

Defenses

Stun:No effect.	A defensive system may be knocked out or destroyed. Note
Wound:System knocked out (damage makes it unusablethat armor is never affected by enemy fire.

until repaired). About 20 percent of the area's cargo -is ru ined.
  Mortal: System destroyed. About 50 percent of the cargo is ruined.

Stun:No effect.
Wound:System may be knocked out; roll a damage check. Mortal:The system is knocked out and may be destroyed;
make a damage check. Destroyed capacitors inflict 1 point of

  Critical:System destroyed. All cargo ruined. Make a d-am wound damage per point of stored shield energy to the-dam age check; on a failure, room is destroyed and explosiv-e deaged ship.
compression inflicts d8-3 points of additional wound damage Critical:The system is destroyed.
to the ship. This damage has a firepower equal to the ship Generators for deflection inducers, particle screens, magnet-

class and ignores armor and other defenses.

Command Deck or Cockpit
The ship's command deck is hit.

ic screens, displacers, or ablative shields are a special case.
  If one shield generator is knocked out or destroyed, the shield is degraded. Shields that add step penalties to t-he at tacker's roll are reduced in effect by 1 step. Particle screens are reduced to half effect. Ablative shield generators become

Stun:The ship may not maneuver or change speed in thehalf as effective (incoming damage creates twice as many
next movement phase.	shield points to absorb as normal).
Wound:The command deck is knocked out. The ship may not If half of the ship's shield generators are knocked out or
maneuver or change speed until the command deck is repaired.estroyed, the shield stops working altoge.ther

Engines

Hits to the ship's engines reduce its acceleration and m-aneu

Wound:The system is knocked out. Mortal:The system is destroyed.
Critical: The system is destroyed, and explosive de-com

verability. Each engine destroyed or knocked out reduces thperession or secondary explosions inflict an additional d8-3 ship's acceleration by 1 and its Maneuverability Class by 1wound points to the target vessel.
point. (Obviously, if the ship's last engine is knocked out or

destroyed, it can't accelerate or maneuver at all.) A sh-ip re duced to an acceleration of 0 or less can't change speed, but

Pow er Plant

a negative MC simply means that some maneuvers ma- y reHits to the ship's power plants and power distribution system
quire multiple rounds to accomplish.	result in a loss of available power. Each power plan-t de
Stun: The engine may be knocked out. Make a damagestroyed or knocked out reduces available ship power by the

check; if the roll fails, the engine is knocked out. Wound:The engine is knocked out.

corresponding amount. If a ship loses all of its power plants to damage, it may not maneuver or fire weapons until at least

Mortal:The engine is knocked out and may be destroyed.one knocked-out power plant is brought back on line.
Make a damage check; on a failure, the engine is destroyed. Stun:The power plant may be knocked out. Make a d- am

Critical:The engine is destroyed.

FTL

age check; on a success, the power plant is unaffected. On a failure, the power plant is knocked out.
Wound:The power plant is knocked out. Mortal:The power plant is destroyed.

The ship's faster-than-light drive is knocked out or destroyed. Critical:The power plant is destroyed. Secondary e-xplo

Stun:Drive may be knocked out. Make a damage check. Wound:The drive is knocked out.

sions inflict 2d6 points of wound damage to the ship, which are unaffected by toughness or arm. or

  Mortal: The drive is knocked out and may be destroyed. Make a damage check; on a success, the drive is just knocked out, but on a failure it has been destroyed.


Sensor

Critical: The drive is destroyed. Secondary explosionsOne of the ship's sensors may be knocked out or destroyed.

(jump drive, stardrive, or warp drive only) inflict d12-6 points of critical damage.

Hangar Hit
One of the ship's hangars is hit. Stun:No effect.

Stun:On a failed damage check, the system is knocked out. Wound: The system is knocked out.
  Mortal:The system is knocked out and may be destroyed. Make a damage check.
Critical:The system is destroyed.

Stores

Wound:System knocked out (damage makes it unusable un-
til repaired). 10 percent of the hangar's stored craft are ruined.One of the ship's support systems that supply the crew with Mortal:System destroyed. About 25 percent of the storedfood or water is hit. There are no immediate effects to losing
craft are damaged beyond rep.air	a stores system, but it may cause trouble after the battle.

  Critical:System destroyed. About 50 percent of the stored craft are ruined.

Stun:No effect. Wound:System knocked out.
Mortal:System knocked out and may be destroyed; make

Life Suppor t

a damage check.
Critical:System destroyed.

The ship may lose its life support equipment or related machin- ery. A ship suffers a +1 step penalty to all crew checks if no life support units remain functional. If all life support units are de-


Weapons

stroyed, the ship loses artificial gravity and may not maneuver.A hit to a weapon system may degrade its performance,
Stun:No effect.	knock it out, or destroy it outright.
Wound:Life support may be knocked out; roll damage check. Stun: The weapon mount is degraded and suffers a +1
Mortal:Life support is knocked out and may be destroyed;step penalty to all attack rolls until repaired. If a degraded

make a damage check. Critical:Life support is destroyed.

Miscellaneous System

weapon is degraded again, it's knocked out.
  Wound:The mount is degraded and may be knocked out. Make a damage check.
  Mortal:The mount is knocked out and may be destroyed. Make a damage check.

If it's not covered by an entry above, here's a basic list of effects. Critical:The mount is destroyed. Make a damage check; on a Stun:The system is degraded in some way, if possibole. N failure, magazine or accumulator explosions inflict internal dam-
effect if it can't really be degraded.	age equal to a Good-quality hit from the affected weapon system.

SPECIAL ORDERS

Position after Ramming

Desperate times demand desperate measures. On occasioInf,the ramming vessel or the target is destroyed outright, the commanders may need to consider unorthodox tactics succhollision has no effect on the surviving vessel's position. A as ramming, boarding, and self-destruction to achieve theifrighter can't stop a fortress ship in its tracks with a head-on

goals or to deny the enemy victo. ry

Ramming

ram, whereas the fortress ship would just plow through a squadron of kamikaze fighters without slowing down.
  If both ships survive, the larger ship loses half of its- cur rent speed and the smaller ship has its speed reduced to

An accidental collision is just not possible under norma- l cirzero. If they're both the same class (heavy, medium, and so cumstances. Each hex of the map is 1,000 kilometers acrosso,n) the ship with the larger number of hull points is the-larg and two ships a few hundred meters long maneuvering iner ship. Both ships lose half their current speed if they're the that area just won't hit each other-unless one of the captainesxact same size.

is trying to ram the other. Then the odds improve from near- impossible to just highly unlike. ly

Executing a Ram
  
A ship reduced to speed 0 by a collision is assigned a- ran dom facing. Roll a d6 to see which way it's pointing after the collision.
  If the either ship is immobilized and the enemy vessel is traveling at an adjusted speed of 2 or less after the hit, either

To conduct a ramming attack, a captain must end his moveside may initiate a boarding action in the special orders in the same hex as his target and be moving at a speed equaplhase.
to or greater than the target. Rams take place in the special

orders phase, after all weapon fire.
The ramming ship makes a crew check (or a Vehicle Ops-

Boarding

spacecraftskill check on the part of the pilot) with a +1 step Basically, no ship can be boarded unless it consents to the act penalty for each point of difference in speed between th-e taror is rendered completely unable to maneuver in its ow-n de
get and the ramming ship.	fense. Any ship with some amount of maneuverabilit-y re
  If the ramming ship succeeds in its attack roll, the target ismaining can evade boarding pods or spaceborne troo-ps in at risk of collision. The target vessel can automatically avoidefinitely. The only exception to this rule is ships equipped collision if its Maneuverability Class is currently higher thanwith boarding transporters, which can beam their boarding the ramming ship's Maneuverability Class. If the rammingteams directly on board the enemy vessel provided no-func ship currently has an equivalent or better MC, the targe-t vestional energy screen interferes with the transport.
sel is entitled to a crew check (or Tacticssp-ace combast kill	Boarding is resolved in three steps: approach, entry, and

check by the captain) to avoid the collision. Add the targeat ssault. vessel's target size modifier to the avoidance check.



Approach

Ramming Damage

In the boarding approach, the boarding party faces its most

Ramming damage is low impact (LI) damage. The target of avulnerable moment. An assault can be broken in moments of ram suffers damage based on the ramming vessel's size, aesnemy fire while the boarding teams remain exposed in open

shown below:

Ramming Base	 Base Vessel	Damage	Firepower Small	 2d4m	 Medium
Light	3d4m	Heavy
Medium 3d8m	S-Heavy
Heavy	4d8m	S-Heavy S-Heavy 6d12m	S-Heavy

space.
  Boarding Pods:Boarding pods are deployed during the launch phase and maneuver like small ships. They have an acceleration of 0.5 and a Maneuverability Class of 2. B-oard ing pods have 5/5/2 stun/wound/mortal points, a target size modifier of +3 steps, Good toughness, and 1d4 points -of ar mor. Boarding pods move in the small craft segment of the movement sequence.
  To board a target, a boarding pod must end its move in the same hex as the target. Boarding occurs in the special orders

  Add +1 die per point of speed difference between the ram-segment of the round-after the attack phase, so boarding ming ship and the target (maximum of twice the listed damagep).ods that are hit by last-ditch defensive fire probably won't
The ramming vessel suffers damage equal to the damagesurvive to deploy their troops.
inflicted to the target, with a firepower equal to the class of Spaceborne TroopsIn: lieu of a boarding pod, troops may
the target. A fighter that crashes into a fortress ship travelingbe equipped with powered armor or E-suits and zGero-
at the same speed inflicts 2d4 points of mortal damage withthrusters. To deploy spaceborne troops directly, the launching medium firepower; it suffers 2d4 points of mortal damage, ofship must end its movement phase in the same hex as the
Super-heavy firepowe. r	target, with the same speed and the same heading. Assum-

ing it survives long enough, the attacking ship deploys its Note that the losses arebased on the size of the attacking	31
cial orders phase of the rounadfter their launch. In other  points of damage to the attackers.
words, troops deployed in the launch phase of round 3 Boarding damage reduces the enemy's own boardin-g val
don't land and attack until the special orders phase of roundue. The first side reduced to a boarding value of zero loses.
4. The enemy ship can fire on spaceborne troops "in tran-Optionally, either side may surrender after any round of-com sit" during its attack phase; each troop has a +5 step tar-bat. If the forces are closely matched and neither side gets get modifier and is killed (messily) by any shipboardlucky, the assault is likely to be bloody and may last for a

weapon hit.
  Boarding Transporters:Troops teleported via boarding transporter skip the approach step.

Entr y

dozen or more game rounds.

Effects of Boarding	
While a boarding assault is in progress, the ship in question suffers a +3 step penalty to all crew checks (except for the

Upon reaching their target, boarding pods or spacebornecheck made against the boarding party). The crew is far too troops have to effect entry into the hull. This usually meansdistracted to perform their normal duties well while they're cutting through an airlock, using a shaped charge to blow oubtusy repelling boarders.
a bulkhead, or something of the sort. Starting on the first Ignore this penalty if the boarding value of the attackers is
round the marines reach the target, the boarding party may10 percent or less of the boarding value of the crew. Ten attempt a crew check to effect entry in each special ordersmarines can't seriously distract a fortress ship crewed by phase. If the ship in question is shaken, disabled, or crippledthousands of enemy troops.
by damage, the normal attack bonuses for these conditions Crew Quality:If a ship loses half of its initial boarding -val
apply to the boarder's entry check.	ue in defense, its crew quality drops by one grade due-to ca
While effecting entry, boarders are "beneath the guns" andsualties. If a ship loses three-quarters of its boarding value in

can't be targeted by shipboard weapons.
Boarding transporters skip the entry step.

Assault

defense, its crew quality drops by two grades. If losses reach 90 percent, the crew drops by three quality grades. Green crews drop to a crew check number of 8, then 6, and so on. Prize Crew:Normally, it will take a boarding party at least twenty to thirty minutes to make a captured ship ready for

On the special orders phase in which the boarding par-ty efmaneuvering or battle. They have to repair last-ditch -sabo fects entry, they may commence the assault. You could playtage efforts, release security lock-outs, coerce key members
out the assault as a mini-scenario using AthLeTERNITYgame	of the enemy crew into helping out, and so on. In general, a
rules, or you can simply use quick and dirty rule presentedcaptured ship can't rejoin the battle on the enemy side before
here.	the battle is ove.r
Count up the attackers and defenders in the boardin-g ac CasualtiesAssume:	that half of all losses in boarding-val

tion, assigning a point value based on the following chart: Troop in powered armor	5
Nonpowered troop	2
Crewman	1
Passengers	0.5

ue are killed in action. The other half of boarding losses are injured or incapacitated and will recover in time. If there are several different groups among an attacking force or -a de fending crew, assume that losses are proportional to each. For example, if a defending ship lost 80 percent of its b-oard ing value before surrendering, you can assume that 4 out of

  For example, a boarding party consisting of twenty5 defending troops, 4 out of 5 defending crewmen, and 4 out marines in zero-G body tanks has a boarding value of 100of 5 defending passengers were casualties.
points. A defending crew with 20 nonpowered troops, 30

crewmembers, and 10 passengers has a boarding value of 40+30+5, or 75.

Self-Destruct

  Each round during the special orders phase, both sidesThe ultimate tactic of desperation, self-destruction is no-rmal make crew checks and inflict damage based on their ownly reserved as a last measure to prevent the capture of a

boarding value:

Result	% of value inflicted
Failure	5 percent
Ordinary	10 percent
Good	20 percent
Amazing	30 percent

ship. Self-destruction requires a crew check with a -3 step bonus in the special orders phase, although normal penalties for disabled or crippled ships apply; badly damaged ships may not have the means to self-destruct anymore.
  If successful, the ship self-destructs in the special orders phase designated by the commander. Usually, the captain will set the charges with a delay of several game rounds so that any surviving crew can reach escape shuttles or lifeboats

and abandon ship. However, this is not a requirement.
  When a ship self-destructs, it creates an explosion equal to that caused by the loss of more than twice its critical poinAt

Squadron Attacks
squadron attack works much like a missile flight. Make

score. See Explosion Dama,goen TABLE2-3.

SQUADRON ACTIONS

one attack roll for the entire squadron, taking into account all the factors that normally apply (target size modifier, weapon accuracy, range, enemy defensive systems, and so on.). Then, refer to the table below, using the success level of the

Large groups of small craft can take up a lot of time an- d atsingle attack roll. tention in a fleet engagement. To keep the game moving, you
may want to use these squadron rules. A squadron is defined	Table 2-5: Squadron Attacks
as any group of small craft that will maneuver and atta-ck to	Attack	% of Hits of Success
gether.RollOGANote that there is a slight game advantage in grouping intoFailure25%15%10%squadrons. Not only is it more convenient for the players, butOrdinary30%20%10%a squadron attack is a little more effective than a number ofGood35%20%15%individual attacks, especially for difficult targets. Ships in a squadron also tend to retain their combat effectiveness longerAmazing40%25%20%under enemy fire, because individual system failures just The percentage is simply the number of hits of that suc-

    aren't as significant.
Creating Squadrons

cess obtained by the squadron, based on the total number of attacks it would have made as individuals. For exam- ple, a flight of ten fighters carrying two MRB bombs each is making twenty attacks, in effect. Under the squadron at-

Small craft of 20 hull points or less may group into squadronstack rule, only one ship actually rolls an attack die. If the by beginning the round in the same hex, with the same speedresult is a Good success, 35 percent of those twenty at- and the same heading. Usually this means that a carriertacks (or 7 hits) are Ordinary-level hits for mass-reaction launches some number of fighters in a launch phase, and albl ombs; 20 percent (or 4 hits) are Good-level hits for the fighters launched at the same time then form a squadronm. ass-reaction bombs; and 15 percent (or 3 hits) are Fighters might also choose to "loiter" near their carrier whileAmazing-level hits for mass-reaction bombs. The remain-

more small craft are launched and form up.
  Every ship in the squadron must be identical in all c-har acteristics. If a carrier launches sSixtarwindtype fighters and

ing six bombs miss the target.
  The result of each hit is resolved normally. In the pre- ceding example, there are a total of 14 MRB bomb hits on

four Hammertype fighters, these ships would have to b-e di the target that will score damage, force armor rolls, and vided into two squadrons, not one ten-fighter squadrosn. It'possibly cause system damage checks.
generally not a good idea to use the squadron rules if any of If the squadron is attacking with a weapon that is capa-
the ships are going to be piloted by a player-controlled heroble of battery fire (say, a fighter with four lasers in a bat-
characte.r	tery), each potential hiits counted as part of the attack to-
  Squadrons can "break up" into any smaller formations atal. Ten fighters firing four lasers each is forty potential any time. A twenty-fighter squadron might travel together fohr its, so the number of hits is based on forty weapons. The several game rounds, and then break up into two 10-sh-ip elbestresult of the battery fire attack roll is used as the suc-
ements to engage two different enemy targets.	cess level of the squadron attack roll.
For ease of play, we suggest that squadrons should- con If the squadron attacks with an autofire weapon, the to-
sist of no more than twenty ships at a time. Whenever- postal number of weapons firing idsoubled.The best result sible, the controlling player should try to create 10-ship- elein the autofire attack acts as the success level of the

ments and avoid very small or very large squadrons.

Squadron Maneuvers

squadron attack roll. For example, ten fighters each firing a single autofire-capable laser count as twenty weapons, not ten.

A single marker or miniature on the map represents a squadron. All ships in the squadron move together. If the

Squadron Damage

squadron leader makes a maneuver check, all ships in theTo speed play, squadrons take damage differently than in- squadron pass or fail the check with the leader's roll. For aldl ividual ships. All weapons or attacks firing at a squadron movement purposes, the squadron is treated as a single shimp ake normal attack rolls. However, instead of rolling dam- whose movement is copied exactly by every other ship in theage against individual fighters or bombers, simply track the squadron. All ships in the squadron are located in the samenumber and level of successes scored by the attacking hex, but are assumed to be spread out over dozens or- hunweapons. Then convert these into fighter losses, based on
dreds of kilometers within that hex.	the attacker's firepower:

Small Craft Firepower
1 Amazing = 1 kill
2 Good = 1 kill
  3 Ordinary = 1 kill Light Firepower
1 Amazing = 1 kill
1 Good = 1 kill
2 Ordinary = 1 kill
Medium (or higher) Firepower Every hit = 1 kill

at each Progress Level are more and more capable than those available at the previous level, the change betweLen P 7 through PL 9 is an incremental change.
  Space combat in Progress Level 6 is different. The d- iffer ence between ships of the Gravity Age and the Energy Age is the difference between a World War II cruiser and an Aegis cruiser; by comparison, a ship of Progress Level 6 is a ship of the line from the Napoleonic Wars. It's an entirely different set of capabilities and style of combat.
  In this section, we'll examine some of the special rules that apply to PL 6 ships and how ships of radically different

  Ignore all "fractional" kills. For example, a squadro-n at Progress Level interact with each other on the battlefield. tacks a battleship. The battleship's antifighter armament, a

dozen plasma cannons (small craft firepower), scores 2 Amazing, 1 Good, and 4 Ordinary hits. The Amazing-level

Game Scale

hits kill a fighter each, and three of the Ordinary-level hits geBt attles between ships of Progress Level 6 work better on

another one. The other hits aren't counted.

Squadron vs.  Squadron

maps with scales of 50 kilometers per hex.
  Each game round is 5 minutes long (ten times longer than the 30-second round for normal space combat). The n-et ef fect is that hexes are twenty times smaller at PL 6, and

What happens when a squadron attacks a squadron? Firstr,ounds ten times longer, so PL 6 ships maneuver two- hun the squadron initiating the attack must move to a positiondred times slower than ships of PL 7 or hig.her
within weapon range of the target squadron. It can fire on At this scale, a ship moving at speed 1 is traveling 50
(and possibly be fired on by) the target squadron norm. ally kilometers per 5 minutes-or roughly 600 kilometers per The target squadron must immediately decide whether tohour. Usually, ships are traveling this slowly only for the most engage its attackers or to keep maneuvering normally. To end-elicate maneuvering; on interplanetary trips, ships might gage the attackers, the target squadron must be traveling at raeach speeds of a million kilometers per hour, which is a
speed of 9 or less, and the attackers must be traveling at aspeed of 1,600 hexes per round. An acceleration of 1 -is ap speed no more than 3 higher than the target squadron. It's posp-roximately equal to 17 G. A ship with an acceleration of 1 sible for an attacking squadron to avoid engagement by usingwould require 1,600 5-minute rounds-a little more than five
hit-and-run tactics against a slow-moving target squadron.  days-to reach a speed of one million kilometers per.hour

  If the target chooses to engage the attacking squadron, both squadrons stop maneuvering normally. They remain fixed in place at the site of the attacking squadron, caught up in a furious


Sequence of Play for PL 6

dogfight. The dogfight lasts until one squadron or the other is deC-hanging the scale of the game makes it advisable to change stroyed or withdraws. (The dogfight must last at least one roundt.h) e sequence of play. For Fusion Age combats, the re- com
  To withdraw from a dogfight, a squadron must declare itsmended sequence of play is: intent in its step of the movement phase. The opposing

squadron can let them go or can attempt to keep them- en gaged. Roll crew checks for each squadron; the winne- r de cides if the fleeing squadron can withdraw or not. The side with themostships left in the dogfight wins ties.

Edge Phase Power Phase Sensor Phase First Attack Phase

During a dogfight, apply squadron attacks and squadron Shipboard Weapons

damage normally. However, unengaged ships fire into the melee attack with a +3 step penalty (they have to be careful not to hit their own fighters by mistake).

FUSION AGE SPACE COMBAT
Chapter 1: Basic Combaatnd most of the game systems-de scribed so far inChapter 2: Advanced Combaarte intended
for use in games set at Progress Level 7, 8, and 9-the-Grav ity Age, Energy Age, and Matter Age. Ships of these te-chnol ogy levels possess powerful engines that can provide-thou sands of "Gs" of acceleration, and some method for pr-otect

Movement Phase
a. Capital Ships
b. Light and Medium Ships
c. Small Craft
     d. Missiles Second Attack Phase
a. Shipboard Weapons
     b. Missiles Launch Phase Repair Phase

Note that there is a fire phase before movement for direct-

ing their human cargo from the effects of such radicalfire weapons, and a fire phase after movement for direct-fire maneuvers. Even though the weapons and systems availablweeapons and missile attacks.

34	Movement at PL 6
  
Whatever the ship does in this round becomes its beginning vector for the next. If the ship chose to slow down and round to-

Most engines of the Fusion Age are reaction engines. Unlike thweard the right, its new vector is shown iInG.F2-1C below right: gravity drives or space-warping drives of higher Progress Lev-

els, PL 6 engines do not permit impossible maneuvers such as banks, rolls, or loops in space. Ships of PL 6 fly like rockets.

Facing


Vectors

Adjusting a vector head requires a ship to continuously acceler- ate in the right direction. It doesn't happen all at once (that would turn the crew into raspberry jelly on the bulkheads). Instead, the

Forget everything we already told you about how ships changeship points its main drives in the necessary direction and burns speed and maneuver. Fusion Age ships must abide by vectorefduel to change its course and speed.
movement. On the surface, this isn't all that different from the For game purposes, this is reflected by a simple rule: A ship's
movement rules inChapter 1: Basic Comb-aut nless some force  facing at the end of its move must match the direction in which
acts on the ship, it will retain its current course and speed fromits vector was adjusted. If the vector was adjusted two hexes now until the end of time. To mark the ship's current vector, placestraight back because the ship's trying to hit the brakes, then the a marker of some kind in the hex the ship will end its next moveship mustbe facing straight back.
in if nothing else happens.	In the previous example, the vector head was adjusted two
To maneuver (which includes speeding up and slowinghexes back and to the right. The ship doneost point its nose at

down), don't move the ship counter or miniature. Instmeaodv,e the marker that indicates where the ship is headingThtoe. en-

its new destination hex; it points its nose at the new destination hex, as it would have to drive there from its old destination hex.

tire sum of a ship's maneuverability is its acceleration rating, If a ship doesn't adjust its vector head, it can choose any fac-
since this is the number of hexes the ship's vector head can bieng desired during its movement. moved from its current location.

  For example, a Fusion Age ship flying at a speed of 8 should mark its current vector as shown inIG.F2-1A at lower right.

Fusion Age Fir e

  If the ship has an acceleration rating of 2, during its move-Since the game round is so long for PL 6 ships, the round se- ment it can choose to shift its vector head 2 hexes in any direcq-uence includes an extra fire phabseforemovement. In addi- tion. In other words, the ship can finish its move in any of thetion, there is no hierarchy of fire for beams, torpedoes, missiles,
hexe indicated inIGF2-1B directly below.	and bombs. Direct fire weapons (beams, projectiles, torpedoes,


and special weapons) fire first, followed by any kind of If you want to be precise about things, the PL 6 ship must di-	35
  Since the hexes are only 50 kilometers across, multiply allit can increase speed or how fast it can adjust its vector. range figures for PL 6 weapons by five. A laser cannon has a

range of 1/2/3 hexes on the standard scale, but on tuhseioFn Age scale the laser cannon has a range of 5/10/15 hexes for short/medium/long range. (Yes, it should be multiplied by a fac- tor of 20, but you can assume that PL 7 ships mounting PL 6 weapons are actually carrying improved versions of those
weapons with better rates of fire and better long-range targeting. In other words, a strictly PL 6 battle works better at this scale, and as long as it's internally consistent, don't worry about it.)

PL 6 Acceleration	Converts
1	0.005
2	0.010
3	0.015
4	0.02
5	0.025
6	0.03

This means that a PL 6 ship with an acceleration of 2

Crossing Scales

would have to accelerate continuously f1or00 game roundsto effect a vector change of one hex from its current

The best way to handle a PL 6 ship (or a ship with PL 6 propul-vector head. This is why we suggest a separate game scale sion technology, anyway) fighting a PL 7 ship is to treat the PLof 5-minute rounds and 50-kilometer hexes for Fusion Age 6 ship as a flying bunker, locked to a certain course and speeds.pace combats.
In other words, the Fusion Age ship must plod along a straight Fire: We recommend ignoring the change of range scales
course while the Gravity Age ship flies rings around it.	and time scales. Allow the PL 6 ship to fire just like a PL 7
Scale:Use the standard PL 7 game scale (1000 kilometersship on the normal combat scale. Obviously, this is a major
to a hex, 30 seconds to a game round).	improvement, but what's the fun of controlling a flying
Sequence of PlayU: se the standard (PL 7) sequence of play.bunker if it never gets to shoot?

  Movement:PL 7 (or better) ships maneuver using the nor- mal rules as presented iCnhapter 1: Basic Comb.aFtrankly, the
  
If you want to be more precise, divide the ranges of all the ship's PL 6 weaponry by four. If the ship's weapons

easiest thing to do is to rule that the PL 6 ship may maneuvehr ave a range of less than 1 hex, assign a minimum range normally on every tenth game round and must fly straight oth-of 1 hex for a long range (+3 step penalty) shot. To account erwise. This actually allows the PL 6 ship a lot more maneu-for the difference in rate of fire, the PL 6 ship may fire only
vering than it should get, but it's marginally playable.	once every five game rounds.


36	CHAPTER 3: NARRATIVE COMBAT

So far, we've discussed ship combat as a combat simulation played out on a mapsheet of hexes. Now we're going to shift

Command

our focus over to combat from a player character's point ofThe command station decides which enemies to engage,

view.


HEROES IN COMBAT

where to engage them, and when to break off the action. Most of the command personnel are located in theship' command deck, bridge, auxiliary command deck, flag bridge, or launch towe. r

In the previous two chapters, we've used the term "crew check" as a catch-all for any kind of skill check that the hundreds or thousands of nameless crewmembers on board a major warship might make in the course of a space combat. Player-controlled heroes may make skill checks against their own skills at key battle position- s in stead of relying on the crew's general ab.ility
In general, you can ignore the normal action check- pro
  
Officers:Command officers include the tactical officer (an officer charged with overseeing the details of the en-gage ment), the strike commander (the officer in charge of flight operations), and the ship's captain. If the ship is the squadron flagship, the commodore or admairnadl any off-i cers on her staff are considered command officers.
  Even in a battleship or fortress ship, the number of -com mand officers is very limited. Only the captain and one or

cedure for characters in combat for a combat using the- systwo chosen delegates are responsible for command i-n bat

tems presented inChapter 1: Basic Combaatnd Chapter 2: Advanced Comba. tWhile theALTERNITYaction round conists

tle.
Enlisted:Enlisted are present as necessary to support the

of four 3-second phases, heroes who are manning stationscommand officers. Usually, two or three messen,gceorms m
on a major warship don't get to take three or four or five  operators, and comptechs assist the tactical officer or strike
actions every game round. They make skill checks in placeofficer by watching over various battle comm nets and
of attack rolls, sensor checks, tactics checks, and so on, butdatalinks. Someone's got to keep the radio chatter straight. their individual action checks just aren't significant in the

overall course of the battle.
  If this feels like it denigrates the heroes' role in the fight, look at it this way. Manning a weapon station or a helm station during a battle presents the hero with a complex

Bridge
On many ships, the bridge and the command deck are the same space. Heroes on the bridge (or tasked with bridge

skill check that must be solved to maneuver the ship, fire aresponsibilities) are primarily concerned with the safe-navi

weapon, repair damage, or whate.ver
A hero at the ship's main weapons console isn't just

gation and maneuvering of the ship. They continuously monitor the ship's position, the position of any obstacles or

pushing the button as fast as she can. She's constantly- comhazards (planets, for instance), and the ship's current course puting fire control solutions, monitoring weapon recharge orand heading.
reload procedures, compensating for shipboard damage that Officers:The officer of the deck is the officer in charge of might knock down some of the weapon mounts under her the bridge. She decides where the ship is going an-d an control, choosing sensor input sources that give her the besstwers to the captain and the tactical officer's requirements. view of the battle for her job, and trying to pay attention to The officer of the deck is usually assisted by a junior officer

any new firing orders that might be issued. She's per-form ing a number of small tasks to make that one attack roll with that weapon or batte.ry

Hero Stations

of the deck. The ship is actually "flown" by a helomfficer, conning officer, pilot, or helm operator answering to th-e of ficer of the deck. The astrogator provides navigational-infor mation to the officer of the deck.
  On small warships, the officer of the deck is probably the tactical officer. The helm operator may be a certified flight

When the battle begins, the Gamemaster should determineofficer, or she may be an enlisted person who maneuvers where each player-controlled hero is located and what eachthe ship at the conning officer's orders.
hero is going to try to do. Clearly, a character imprisoned in Enlisted:The helm operator and lee helm operator a-ctu
the ship's brig can't take any actions to help her shipmatesally drive the ship if the ship doesn't have an officer pilot. fire the ship's guns. Possible stations include the following: Messengers and comm operators help to keep the bridge in

• Command	• Bridge
• Combat Information	• Computers
• Communications	• Sensors
• Weapons and Defenses	• Engineering
• Repair	• Internal Security
• Flight	• Boarding Party

contact with other vital stations on the ship. The astrogator usually has a small team of quartermasters (navigators) to track the ship's position. The boatswain of the watch is the enlisted person who maintains order on the bridge an-d su pervises the junior enlisted people under the officer of the deck's command.

Combat Information

ships slave weapon controls to a central station near thesship' captain and her command team. However, large weapon

On many warships, the command deck and the comb-at in mounts usually have crews associated with them who fire as formation center are located in the same space, along with directed by the central station. These mount crews can also the bridge. For example, a destroyer's command deck- usu fire independently if the ship's command deck is wiped out or ally includes command, navigation, sensor, and weapo-n stacommunications and remote firing controls are knocked out by tions all in the same general area of the ship. The combat enemy damage. Therefore, most major mounts have a mount

information center houses most of the ship's se,nsor weapon, and communication stations.
Officers:The combat information officer ensures that the

captain or battery commander who commands the local.crew Enlisted:Enlisted gunners usually man the weapon control stations in the command deck or in the mount. A large mount

center works as it's supposed to and advises the tactic-al of may require a dozen or more highly trained specialists t-o op
ficer or captain as needed. The intelligence officer analyzeserate in a battle.
enemy vessels and advises the tactical officer of their -capa

bilities. Depending on the size of the ship, sensor and weapon officers may supervise their system operators from

Engineering

the combat information cent.er
  Enlisted:The combat information center is crammed full of consoles and control stations for most of the ship's- sen

The ship's helmsmen or pilots normally "control" the ship' engines remotely through their own stations on the bridge or command deck. Control is slaved from the local consoles

sor, weapon, defensive, and comm systems. A sensor-opergoverning the exact operation of each individual engine to

ator or weapon operator mans every station.

Computers
The ship's computer core and its control computers are usually manned in battle by comptechs under the sup- ervi

the main engineering console in the engineering control center. Then engine control is slaved up to the command level. It's the responsibility of the engineering department to keep the ship's engines and power plants available to the command team so that the ship can execute the weapon fire and maneuvering required in battle.

sion of a computer officer. They make sure that the co-mput  Officers:An engineering officer is usually present on the
ers operate at peak efficiency and initiate or defend againstcommand deck or bridge to monitor systems status boards

data warfare as necessary. The computer officer may be stationed on the bridge or command deck.

Communications
Comm operators under the supervision of the commu-nica tions officer man most communication systems on board

and handle orders that are more complex than simple- ma neuvering. She answers to the officer of the deck or the tactical officer. The nerve center of the ship's engineering section is the engineering control center or main eng-ineer ing, a command station that controls and monitors all-pow er plants, life support, drive systems, engines, and oth-er en gineering systems. Finally, large ships may have smaller

the ship. The communications stations are typically locatedcontrol stations for major systems such as individua-l en in the combat information center (or command deck), so thegines or power plants. Engineering, drive, and auxilia-ry of

comm officer reports to the combat information officer or tactical office.r

ficers supervise these stations.
Enlisted:Enlisted are similar to what was described above

Comm officers and techs ensure that the ship maintains for the officers. sUually, enlisted specialists are stationed near

clear and secure communications and data feeds with all friendly ships in the area. They also supervise attempts to jam enemy communications.

Sensors
Every sensor system on board is manned by a senso-r op erator reporting to the sensor officer (or science officer).

the local control panels for the systems they're familiar with.

Repair
If everything works right and the ship sustains no damage, most crewmembers don't have much to do in a battle-. Un fortunately, this is rarely the case. Repair parties stand by to patch hull breaches, aid wounded, fight fires, correc-t sys

The sensor stations are usually located in the combat-infor tem failures, rig bypasses, and generally keep the ship

mation cente.r

Weapons and Defenses
  Crewmembers serving the ship's weapons and defenses work in one of two places: the ship's command deck or the weapon mounts.
  Officers:The tactical officer directs the activities of crewmembers manning central weapon stations. Most- war

spaceworthy as long as possible under enemy fire.
  The chief engineer oversees damage control efforts through her representative, the damage control officer or as- sistant. Each repair party is under the leadership of a repair officer, usually a deck officer or supply officer since these jobs don't require their attention in battle. Dozens of enlisted men-again, largely consisting of deck, supply, and support staff-round out the party, with a handful of repair specialists who train exclusively on damage control procedures.

Flight
Carriers and assault ships that carry squadrons of sm-all at

or Amazing success he confers a -1, -2, or -3 step bonus to his team's crew check for that round.
A hero can affect only the crewmembers assigned to

tack craft or fighters possess flight sections or departments.one particular task or station. For game purposes, you can
The strike officer is usually a high-ranking officer of the define this as one die roll per round-an attack roll, sensor
embarked squadron. She mans the flight tower and directs check, repair check, maneuver check, or any similar roll.
the operations of strike and fighter craft that are away from	For example, the captain of a ship might use his L-ead
the ship. The strike officer answers to the captain, much	ership skill to help the bridge team through evasive maneu-
like the tactical officer. A team of junior officers and enlistedvers, direct the fire of one battery, or supervise one repair

crewmembers in the tower or the ship's command deck provide traffic control, strike communications, and patrol command and control.
Obviously, any flight crews involved in flying strike-s, in

check, but he couldn't do all three at the same time.

Edge

tercepts, or combat patrols are on duty, too. There are threeIf you are playing withALTERNITYcharacters, have the ch-ar
basic missions for small craft: striking enemy targets-, pro acter in command of the fleet make a Tactsicpsa-ce combat
viding fighter cover for friendly strike forces, and providing skill check instead of a crew check. fighter cover for the carrier to defeat enemy strikes. Any

strike force or fighter flight normally answers to a flight leader, the senior officer airborne.
Carriers may have hundreds of crewmembers and- offi

Pow er Distribution
A hero manning the engineering console on the bridge or

cers employed in the hangar deck. During battle, they- refu in main engineering can attempt to increase the amount of

el, rearm, or repair craft as necessary, ensuring that the carrier's small craft are out where they can do the most good instead of bottled up inside the ship.

Internal Security and Boarding Parties
The ship's troops or marines are normally responsible for

power available to the ship in the current pwer phases. He' coaxing the power plant to the limits of its performanc-e, se lectively cutting off nonvital systems, and using his k-nowl edge of the ship's engineering plant to squeeze out every bit of power.
The hero may attempt a System Operatioen-gineering
skill check. (Don't forget the penalties for shaken, disabled, or crippled ships.) He increases the ship's total power points by 10, 20, or 30 percent for an Ordinary, Good, or

providing internal security and defending the ship from- en Amazing success.

emy boarders. Security teams or troop detachments ty-pical ly guard the most important areas of the ship agains-t po tential boarding parties, while reserving several fast -reac tion teams to seal off trouble spots fast.


Sensors
Obviously, a hero manning one of the ship's sensors (or the

If the captain anticipates the opportunity to get boarders main sensor control console) may substitute his System- Op
onto an enemy vessel, the boarding party musters near theeration-sensorsskill check for the ship's crew check when

ship's airlocks or boarding pods.

Hero Tasks

performing a sensor check with that system.

Movement

If you think of a typical round of space combat as dozens oAf hero manning the ship's nav console or helm may s-ubsti
tasks that various members of the ship's crew must ac-com tute a Vehicle Operations-pacecraftskill check for a m-a

plish, then you'll see that a group of player-controlle-d he roes have to pick and choose which tasks demand their

neuver check. If the character is flying a single-seat fi,ghter he can use this skill for attack rolls, sensor checks, an-d oth

personal attention. A team of highly skilled heroes can fighter crew checks. a ship much better than even a crack crew by taking- con
trol of the most important jobs on the ship.



Attacks

The Leadership Skill
Instead of taking a hands-on roll by making skill checks based on his own System Operation or Vehicle Operation

A hero manning the ship's weapons console may use his own System Operationw-eaponsskill in place of the crew check number for all fire from that weapon. Normally, a weapon operator or mount captain may gain this bonus-a

skills, a hero might instead use the Leadership skill to-coor hero working as the ship's tactical officer is too busy to fire dinate the efforts of supporting characters who are actually weapons himself.
firing the guns or maneuvering the ship. The hero in q- ues	On the receiving end, characters manning ships in battle
tion makes a Leadership skill check; on an Ordinary, Good,stand a good chance of being injured or killed by enemy

fire. When the heroes' ship is blasted into atoms by a well- are being killed or wounded by enemy fire, use the fo-llow placed matter bomb or a zero bore hit, someone's likely to ing guidelines.

be hurt. See "Injury and Deathla,"ter in this chapte.r

Repairs
Heroes manning the engineering console on the bridge or
  
First, divide the crew into four groups: 10 percent, 20 percent, 30 percent, and 40 percent. Next, assign these numbers to the ship's four damage tracks: stun, wound, mortal, and critical, respectively. For example, a light cruiser has a total crew of 240 hands. Of these, 24 are on the stun

command deck may repair stun damage or get a knocked- track; 48 on the wound track; 72 on the mortal track; and out system back on line in the repair phase with a suc-cess 96 on the critical track.
ful System Operatione-ngineeringskill check. An Ordinar,y	Boxes marked off on the damage track cause a pr-opor
Good, or Amazing success repairs 1, 2, or 3 points of stun tionate number of crew losses. A light cruiser has 40 stun,
damage.	40 wound, 20 mortal, and 10 critical points. This means
Heroes stationed in main engineering, the ship's damagethat each stun box is "worth" 0.6 crew casualties, each

control center, or the ship's repair parties may repair stun damage, wound damage, or bring knocked-out systems back on line with a successful Technical Scienrceep-air or

wound box is worth 1.2 casualties, each mortal box 3.-6 ca sualties, and each critical box 9.6 casualties for a light cruiser with a crew of 240 hands. If the ship loses 10

juryrig skill check. An Ordinary, Good, or Amazing success wound points and 5 stun points, you can assume that about

repairs 1, 2, or 3 points of damage.

Special Orders

15 (12+3) crewmembers have become casualties.
  Finally, you can assume that about half of all casualties are killed outright, one-quarter are severely wounded and require immediate care, and one-quarter are lightly wo-und

Boarding actions, while rare, are made for heroes. By-lead ed and can wait on medical attention for a short timoe. T ing a boarding party or repelling boarders, a hero's pe-rson continue our example, you could assume 7 dead, 4 badly

al combat skills become the most important assets at his command.
  A hero in charge of a boarding party or security detail may use his Tacticsi-nfantry combator Leadership-com - mandskill to add a -1, -2, or -3 step bonus to his sside' boarding combat crew check for an Ordinary, Good, or

wounded, and 4 with slight wounds. The death rate is high because the effects of antiship weapons on crewmembers who happen to be near the impact site are often quite-grue some.
  Losses to the crew don't have any game effect unless called for by specific results on the hit location table. In

Amazing success. At the hero's option, he can instead applygeneral, the step penalties for shaken, disabled, and- crip
a +1, +2, or +3 step penalty to the enemy's boarding	pled ships reflect increasing crew losses among oth-er ef
combat crew check. This increases the enemy losses -inflictfects. These guidelines are provided just as a point of-infor ed by the troops under his command, or reduces the-casu mation.
alties of friendly troops.

  If the hero is not in a position of command, you ca-n as sume that he's worth twice as many boarding points as a similarly armed and armored trooper. You may prefer to actually sketch out a short scenario for the heroes to play

Heroes at Hazar d
If you don't want to keep track of the exact location of each player character on board or the exact location of a-ll in

through, and base the success or failure of the boardin- g accoming enemy fire, you can simply use this rule. Any time

tion on the success or failure of the heroes' encou. nter

Injury and Death
What happens when six player characters are among the thousand crewmembers of a battleship that sustains heavy damage? Presumably, dozens or hundreds of thesship' crew might have been injured or killed during the battle.

the ship marks off damage on its damage track, there is a chance that a hero on board suffers damage. Each player rolls a d20 to determine if her hero is endangered by the hit. On larger ships, the odds of any particular hit jeop-ardiz ing the hero are very small.

Table 3-1: Random Hazards (d20)
Ship	Endangered on...

How do you determine if the heroes happened to be among those unfortunate casualties?

Crew Losses
In general, tracking exact crew losses isn't necessasry. It' reasonable to assume that a ship reduced to about half its mortal points has suffered a number of casualties, some of

Class	Stun	Wnd	Mor	Crit Small	 1-4	 1-6	 1-8	1-12
Light	1-3	1-4	1-6	1-8
Medium 1-2	1-3	1-4	1-6
Heavy	1	1-2	1-3	1-4
S-Heavy 1	1	1-2	1-3
For example, if a hero is on board a destroyer (a light

whom are wounded and some of whom are dead. Ho-wev ship) that suffers mortal damage, she is endangered by the
er, if it's important to guess at just how many crewmembersdamage on a roll of -16 on a d20. On a battleship (a

heavy ship) she's endangered only by mortal damage on a roll of 1-3 on a d20.
  Heroes endangered by damage roll Personality feats and compare the results to the following table. Why a Pers-onali ty feat? At this level, the question of whether the hero- hap pens to be standing in the path of the incoming plasma beam is a matter of sheer luck, and Personality measures luck about as well as any heroic attribute.
Table 3-2: Character Injury


Table 3-3: Bail-Out Times
Class	Bail-out Time
Small	Same round
Light	1d4 rounds
Medium	1d6+1 rounds
Heavy	2d6 rounds Super-heavy 3d6 rounds

The figures onTABLE3-3 represent an evacuation of

PER Feat	Secure	Vulnerable Amazing	None	 None
Good	None	1d4s
Ordinary	1d6s	 1d8s Failure	 1d8w	1d12w Crit. Failure 1d6m	 1d8m

  Consider this damage to be low impact, high impact, or energy depending on the weapon that caused the hit. The firepower of the attack is Good. Secured characters are

most surviving crewmembers. Generally, 10 to 20 percent of the surviving crewmembers won't be able to evacuate due to blocked exits, damaged escape craft, severe injuries, and other factors.
  Even though it might take 8 or 10 rounds to completely abandon a large ship, some number of crewmembers will get clear of the wreck every round during the evacuation. Assume that 20 percent of the survivors get clear each round for a light or medium ship, and 10 percent of the survivors get clear each round for a heavy or super-heavy

strapped into their seats and protected by armored ac-celer ship. Player characters can leave as soon as they reach an
ation couches. Vulnerable heroes are any heroes who are escape pod or airlock. trying to move around the ship during the fight.

  This doesn't mean that people routinely survive direct hits from heavy plasma beams. They don't. But the heavy plasma beam wasn't targeting the hero who is endangered by the strike, it was targeting her ship. People in the g-ener

COMBAT WITHOUT
MINIATURES

al vicinity are at hazard from explosive decompression- , fly Many Gamemasters prefer to run their games without using ing shrapnel, explosions, catastrophic system failures, and any maps or miniatures at all. Obviously, the combat rules other such dangers. Direct hits would be handled by meansin the preceding chapters assume the use of some kind of

of the normal damage upgrading rules describedChinapter 1: Basic Comba.t

Heroes on Station
If you would prefer to be more precise about when and where a hero might be injured during battle, refer to the system damage rules iCnhapter 2: Advanced Rul.eDseter- mine which station or system each hero is manning and

map sheet, but you don't have to do this if you prefer not to.
  In the ALTERNITYPlayer's Handbookv,ehicle or spacecraft combat without some kind of physical representation in front of the players is referred to narrative combat resolution.

Position
The only things that matter for positioning in narrative-com bat are the range category and each ship's heading. In- nar

which section or zone of the ship that system is located in. rative combat, assume that every ship in both fleets i-s ma

When that system or location is hit, the heroes are e-ndan gered, just as described in the preceding section.

neuvering in the exact same manner and shares the exact range category, heading, and speed of all friendly vessels in

  For example, the heroes might all be manning a crusiser' relation to the enemy fleet. command deck, which happens to be located in the forward

center section of the ship. When the FC section is hit and the command deck is exposed to a potential System-dam

Range Categories

age check, the heroes are endangered by the damage and Instead of keeping track of the exact distance between the must make Personality feat checks as described in th-e pre enemy fleets, distance is described as one of the following

vious section.



Bailing Out

range categories:
• Disengaged
• Contact
• Extreme

It's usually advisable to bail out of crippled or destroyed craft before more damage makes bailing out impossible. Bailing out or abandoning ship is a special order. It takes a little time to reach the ship's escape system (if any) and get clear of the wreck:
• 
Long
• Moderate
• Close
• Very Close

  DisengagedT: he battle is over, as both ships lose sensor contact with each oth.er
  Contact:Missile fire is possible, but no other weapons can reach the enemy ship or ships.
  Extreme:This is long range for beam or projectile weapons of super-heavy or heavy firepower; no other weapons can fire.
  Long:This is long range for beam or projectile weapons of medium or light firepower; normal range for heavy and super-heavy beam and projectile weapons.
  Moderate:This is long range for torpedoes and special weapons, as well as beam or projectile weapons of small craft firepower. Normal range for all other weapons.
Close:All weapons are at normal range.
  Very Close:Bomb attacks and missile attacks may be- ex ecuted. Beam or projectile weapons of Heavy or Super- heavy firepower, torpedoes, and special weapons mnoaty fire, since they're simply too close.
  Attacks at normal range are conducted normally; at- tacks in a weapon's long range category suffer a +3 step penalty.

Heading


Table 3-4: Narrative Movement
Edge	Opposing Player
Player	Close	Hold	Open Close	 -2 C	 -1 C	??
Hold	-1 C	NE	+1 C
Open	??	+1 C	+2 C

  -2 C: Decrease current range by two categories, to a minimum range of very close.
  -1 C: Decrease current range by one category (min. very close).
NE:No change, keep current range category this round.
+1 C: Increase range by one category (max. disengaged).
+2 C: Increase range by two categories (max. disengaged).
  ??: If both fleets have the same acceleration, the range category remains the same; otherwise, the faster flee-t clos es or opens the range accordin.gly

  Example: TheAudaciousis a Concord destroyer attacking an External frigate. The range category for the first round is contact; this is an open-space encounter. The Concord com- mander decides to pursue the External ship and bring her to battle at a much closer range, so he declares an intent to

Basically, there are three ways a ship can be facing relativeclose. The External commander wants no part ofAtuhdea -

to the enemy: closing, holding, or opening.
  Closing:The ship or ships are generally pointed at the enemy and trying to get closer. Weapons that bear forward (the front firing arc) may be fired at the ene.my
  Holding:The ship or ships are maintaining their posi- tion. They may be drifting in space, or driving in some direction that doesn't really close or open the distance,

cious, and chooses to open the range, hoping to escape alto- gether by increasing the range from contact to disengaged.
  Since the Concord commander wants to close and th-e Ex ternal commander wants to open, the next range category depends on which ship is faster. TAheudacioushas an ac- celeration of 4, while the External frigate only has an a- ccel eration of 3. Since theAudaciousis faster, the range will

instead maneuvering around the enemy. The commanderdecrease by one category, from Contact to Extreme. It will

may choose which of the four firing arcs faces the ene- my.
  Opening:The ship or ships are heading away from the enemy. Weapons that bear aft may be fired at the enemy fleet.
All friendly ships share the same heading in the n-arra

take theAudaciousa couple of more rounds, but she'll eventually run down the External frigate and force her to fight whether she wants to or not.

Sequence of Pla y

tive system. It's assumed that they are maneuvering i-n for While the narrative combat round runs much like the visual

mation to provide mutual support to each o.ther

Movement
In the narrative combat system, the movement phase is simply a set of declarations: Do you want to get closer to the enemy, and which way do you want to be facing?
  The opposing player must declare his heading first. As previously noted, all ships in the opposing player's fleet

combat round, there are some important differences.

Edge Phase Power Phase Sensor Phase Movement Phase
a. Opposing Player Declaration
b. Edge Player Declaration
c. Position Updates

share the same heading in the narrative combat rules. After the opposing player declares his intentions, the edge player declares his intention. Again, all edge ships share the same heading.
  After both sides have declared their heading, adjust the current range category accordingly:

Attack Phase
a. Beam and Projectile Weapons
b. Torpedoes and Special Weapons
c. Missile Attacks
     d. Bomb Attacks Launch Phase
Repair Phase Special Orders

42
Deck



Basic Cr ew




Flight
Flight Crews: As needed
Aviation Techs: 3 per embarked craft

Deckhands: 1 deckhand per 40 hull points
Cargo Handlers: 1 cargo handler per autocargo system, or 1 cargo handler per bay and 2 per hold
Bosuns' Mates:1 boatswain mate per 5 deckhands or cargo handlers
Ship's Bosun
Deck Officers: 1 per 3 bosun's mates First Lieutenant
Engineering
Drive Techs: 1 drive tech per 5 hull points for FTL drives. Engine Tech: 1 engine tech per 10 hull points devoted to en- gines, plus 1 engine tech per engine.
Power Tech: 1 power tech per 10 hull points devoted to power plants, plus 1 power tech per power plant.
Support Tech: 1 support tech per life support system Cold Tech: 1 cold tech per 2 life suspection units
Eco Tech: 1 eco tech per recycler unit or hydroponics bay Petty Officers: 1 engine mate per 5 drive techs, power techs, engine techs, support techs, eco techs, or cold techs
Fuel King (if ship carries fuel)
Engineering Officers: 1 per 3 petty officers Chief Engineer
Navigation
Quartermasters: 2 quartermasters, plus 1 per class (2 for light, 3 for medium, etc.)
Helm operators: 1 helm operator plus 1 per class (2 for light, 3 for medium, etc.)
Petty Officers: 1 per 4 quartermasters or helm operators. Navigator
Operations
Electronics Techs: 1 per sensor or comm system
Comp Techs: 1 plus 1 per class (computer core); 1 per sys- tem assigned a dedicated computer.
Op Specialists: 1 per sensor system; 1 per weapon system; 1 per defensive system.
Intelligence Specialists: 2 on medium ships, 4 on heavy, or 10 on super-heavy ships
Petty Officers: 1 per 3 techs
Officers: 1 per 3 petty officers Operations Officer
Psi-Psi Officers as needed
Auxiliary Engineering
Repair Techs: 1 per 40 hull points
Machinists: 4 per workshop, fabrication facility, or nanomanufacture bay.
Petty Officers: 1 per 4 repair techs or machinists. Damage Control Officer
Weapons
Gunners: 2 per beam or projectile weapon mount, plus 1 per 5 hull points devoted to beam or projectile weapons.
Missile Techs: 2 per missile rack, 4 per missile tube, or 4 per cell array.
Torpedomen: 4 per torpedo system, plus 1 per 5 hull points devoted to torpedo systems.
Petty Officers: 1 per 4 gunners, missile techs, or torpe- domen.
Weapon Officers: 1 per 3 petty officers Chief Weapons Officer

Aviation Storekeepers: 1 per embarked craft Flight Deckhands: 1 per 2 embarked craft Flight Ops Specialists: 1 per 4 embarked craft Aviation Weaponeers: 1 per embarked craft
Petty Officers: 1 per 4 aviation techs, aviation storekeepers, flight deckhands, flight ops specialists, and aviation weaponeers
Officers: 1 per 4 petty officers Flight Officer:
Strike Officer:
Wing Commander:
Science
Technicians: 4 per lab section Science Officers: 1 per lab section Chief Science Officer
Ship's Troops
Marines: As needed Sergeants: 1 per 4 marines
Officers: 1 per 4 sergeants Commander:

Support Cr ew
Medical
Med Techs: 1 per 50 basic crewmembers or 1 per 2 beds in sick bay, whichever is greater
Petty Officers: 1 per 3 med techs Surgeons: 1 per sick bay (troop ships oyn)l Ship's Doctor
Service
Mess Hands: 1 per 20 basic crewmembers
Mess Stewards: 1 per 3 basic officers plus 1 per passenger Petty Officers: 1 per 5 mess hands or mess stewards Mess Chief
Supply
Storeskeepers: 1 per 20 basic crewmembers
Petty Officers: 1 per 5 storeskeepers Supply Officer
Administration
Yeomen: 1 per 40 basic crewmembers
Security Specialists: 1 per 40 basic crewmembers Petty Officers: 1 per 4 yeomen or security specialists Officers: 1 per 3 petty officers
Chief Master-at-Arms Admin Officer Embarked Flag Petty Officers: 20
Officers: 10 Chaplain
Flag Lieutenant Intelligence Officer Admiral Command
Master Chief Petty Officer Executive Officer
Political Officer (if needed) Captain

Edge (Narr ative)

A: Missile launches.
B: Beam and projectile weapons of heavy or super-



than it is in map-based combat. The commander with the edge has the privilege of deciding his heading (described
  
C: Beam and projectile weapons of light or medium firepowe.r

below) after the opposing commander declares his heading. Edge is determined as describedCinhapter 1: Basic
Comba,t with a crew check or a Tacticss-pace tacticsskill check. However, the first tiebreaker for narrative combat is

D: Beam and projectile weapons of small craft firepo. wer E: Torpedoes and special weapons.
F: Bombs and missile impacts.
Normal fire allows an attack roll at no penalty for

ship size; the fleet with the largest or heaviest ship loses ties. The second tiebreaker is number of ships on a side; the side with the fewest ships wins ties.

Sensors (Narr ative)

range. Long-range fire adds a +3 step penalty to the shot.

Special Orders (Narr  ative)	
Chapter 2: Advanced Combcaotvers three special ma- neuvers or actions: ramming, boarding, and self-destruc-

Assume that all sensor systems have normal capability outtion. It's possible to perform these actions in narrative to Extreme range, and long-range capability (checks with acombat, with some modification to the rules.

+3 step penalty) in the Disengaged range cate.gory

Movement (Narr ative)
As described under "Positiona"nd "Movement"on the pre- ceding page, the narrative combat style does not require
  
Ramming:To conduct a ramming attack, a captain must have the edge and must be in the very close range category. The ramming ship must have an acceleration rating equal to or greater than the target's. The ramming ship must pass a crew check (or a Vehicle Osppsa-ce-
craft skill check on the part of the pilot). If the ramming

any kind of map. Range is one of seven general categoriesship succeeds in its attack roll, the target is entitled to a
from disengaged to very close. Heading is relative to the	crew check (or aTctics-space combatskill check by the
enemy ship-is the hero's ship closing, holding, or opening captain) to avoid the collision. Add the target vessel's

the distance between it and its opponent?
   The first step of the movement phase is the opposing commander declaration. The opposing player is the side

target size modifier to the avoidance check.
  The damage of the ramming attack is listed under "Ramming"in Chapter 2: Advanced Comb. aAtfter the

that currently does not have the edge; they have to declareram, the ships involved are at very close range.
their intentions first (close, hold, or open). Then, the edge	Boarding:The entry and assault stages of a boarding
commander declares his intent for the round. Based on theaction work as described iCnhapter 2: Advanced Com -
intentions of both sides, the range between the two ships orbat. The approach stage is a little different, though.

fleets may be updated as shown ToAnBLE3-4.

Attack (Narr ative)

Boarding transporters can be employed at moderate range, provided no energy screen interferes with the transport. For conventional approaches, the boarding ship must be at very close range, and the target vessel

If you're not playing out the battle on a map of some kind, must be unable to maneuver in its own defense.
exact weapon ranges don't matter. Instead, weapons a-re as Self-DestructI:nitiating self-destruction takes place just

signed range categories based on their type and size.
Range	Normal	Long
Category	Fire	Fire
Disengaged	none	none
Contact	A	none
Extreme   A	B
Long	A, B	C
Moderate A, B, C	D, E Close	A, B, C, D, E none Very Close  C, D, F	 none

as described inChapter 2. When a ship self-destructs, it creates an explosion equal to that caused by the loss of more than twice its critical point score. See explosion damage, on TABLE 2-3. Ships that are very close to the detonating vessel are treated as if they were 1 hex away on TABLE 2-3; ships that are close to the detonating ves- sel are treated as if they were 2 hexes away.

44	CHAPTER 4: THE COLD HARD FACTS

Space travel isn't as easy as many science fiction books

Table 4-1: Speeds

and movies make it appear. In the classic space opera,Speed*KPHAu/Hr%cships perform maneuvers that are frankly impossible in1120,0000.00080.01%any kind of realistic sense. Diving fighters somehow create2240,0000.00160.02%screaming shrieks in vacuum. Massive cruisers roll and3360,0000.00240.03%bank like stunt planes at a county fair. And no one worries4480,0000.00320.04%about things like how much acceleration a human body can5600,0000.0040.05%tolerate, relativistic effects, and other intrusions of rea- l sci101.2 million0.0080.1%ence into the fiction at hand.202.4 million0.0160.2%In this chapter we'll take a look at a few "real-world-" is506 million0.040.5%sues that affect spacegoing craft and warfare in the future.12million0.081.1%You don't have to pay attention to any of this; there's a lot41650 million0.335%of outstanding science fiction that chooses not to pay-atten833100 million0.679%tion to the cold hard grasp of reality. But if you prefer a1250150 million1.014%game where the impossible is simply ruled out, read on.2500300 million2.028%3750450 million3.042%


enemy vessels to interfere with its passage-and the harder * At PL 7+ scale; for PL 6 scale, multiply by 200. For
it is for the fast-moving ship to successfully employ its ownexample, a speed of 4 at PL 7 is the same as 800 on the weapons against targets at much slower speeds. The -differPL 6 scale.

ence in velocity (or delta-v, as it's sometimes called- ) be comes a gulf or barrier nearly impossible to cross fro-m ei ther direction.
Imagine a patrol ship traveling at a speed of 10. It-cov
  
Take a look atTABLE4-1. If a ship has an acceleration of 4, it's pretty fast for the Gravity Age. But it needs -to in crease its speed to 1,250 to reach a cruising speed ofU1 A per hour. That's three hundred game rounds of acceleration,

ers ten 1,000-kilometer hexes in 30 seconds, or 1.2 millionor about two and a half hours. kilometers per hour. It can travel from the Earth to the

Moon in about ten minutes, from the Earth to the Sun in about 150 minutes, and from the Sun to Pluto in about 100

High Speed Comba  t

hours. That's pretty fast.
  Now imagine that the patrol ship has orders to intercept an enemy raider entering the inner system at a speed of
100. In terms of the round sequence, the best the patrol

Clearly, there are logistical difficulties in playing out a battle between ships with a delta-v of 50 or 100 points of speed, let alone 500. Most shipboard weapons have a maximum range of ten to twenty thousand kilometers; most shipboard

ship can hope for is one shot at the raider as it passes- . As sensors, forty to sixty thousand kilometers. A ship moving suming the patrol craft has an acceleration of 3, it will takeat a speed of 50 may begin the round outside of weapon 30 roundsof maximum acceleration just to reach the same range, move right past an enemy vessel, and wind up- out
speed as the raider-and then the patrol craft will have to side of weapon range again. For this reason, delta-v acts as
add even more speed to have a chance of overhauling the a barrier to combat. If one ship's traveling at speed 100
raider in a tail chase.	and the other one's going at speed 10, there's nothing they
The raider isn't in a great position if it's imperative that it can do to each other until one slows down or the other

destroys the patrol craft. At a speed of 100, the raider is suffering a penalty of -24 to its maneuvering class- (re member, each four points of speed is a -1 penalty)-. As suming that the raider was MC 3 to begin with, its current MC is -21. . . which means that it can perform a man-eu ver once every 22 rounds. If the raider spots the patrol craft at a range of 1,000 hexes (that's omneillion kilome-

speeds up. By the time that happens, the fast-moving ship will be many millions of kilometers away from the point of initial contact.
  For this reason, most space combat actually takes place in the vicinity of planets or stations where a commander can expect to find his enemy traveling at a few thousand KPH. It's simply impossible to intercept a fast-moving target

ters), it couldn't perform a maneuver to adjust its cours-e acin open space.

cordingly until it was ten full rounds (1,000 hexes) past the patrol ship!
  
For every 10 points of delta-v between the attacker and the target, the Gamemaster may assign a 1-step penalty to attack rolls. A ship at speed 0 suffers a +5 step penalty to

hit a ship traveling at speed 50, and vice versa. Tha-t as sumes, of course, that the ships somehow get within weapons range of each other in the first place.

Achieving Orbit

ACCELERATION
The force of gravity at the surface of the Earth is a con- tinuous acceleration of about 10 meters per second per second straight down. This equates to an increase of roughly 100 KPH per phase, in the standarLdTEARNITY

Sitting at the bottom of Earth's gravity well, we spend a lot round structure. In 30-seconWd arshipsrounds, 1 G rep-

of time thinking about ways to gain enough velocity to achieve orbit or escape Earth's gravitational influence- alto gether. It's just as tricky and takes just as much energy to loseenough velocity to fall into orbit for a spaceship- ap proaching a planet from interplanetary space.
Table 4-2: Orbital Windows
Outbound	PL 7	PL 6
Achieve Orbit 1.5	30
Escape Orbit 3	60
Inbound	PL 7	PL 6
Enter Orbit	1-3	30-60
De-orbit	0-1	0-30

resents an increase in speed of roughly 1,000 kilometers per hour over 30 seconds of continuous acceleration. In other words, if you started the round flying at a speed of 120,000 kilometers per hour and accelerated at 1 G for the whole round, you're traveling at 121,000 kilometers per hour at the end of the round.
  Humans can tolerate 1 G forever; we spend our entire lives pinned to the surface of the planet by this force. Un- fortunately, 1G of acceleration won't get you very far in space travel unless you accelerate for a long, long time. Most spaceship engines at PL 6, 7, and 8 are capable of accelerations of dozens, hundreds, or thousands of Gs.
It's remotely conceivable that fluid tanks, anticoagulants, and artificial respiration might allow a human to endure

This means that a ship must slow down to a reasonable 30 or 40 Gs for a short time, but an unprotected human
speed before entering orbit or attempting a landing. R-each would die pretty quickly under such forces.

ing the vicinity of the planet you're heading toward with a speed of 300 or 400 is useless; the ship will simply sail
  
Higher accelerations would leave nothing but raspberry jam on the bulkheads-if there were bulkheads left. Most

past without a chance of making orbit, or impact the planetships would tear themselves to pieces under acceleration like a big steel meteor. Therefore, a ship has to start d- ecel strong enough to instantly kill a human.
erating a long way out so that it's traveling at a man-age

able speed when it reaches its destination.
For example, a ship traveling at 2 AU per hour is moving

Fusion Age  Trav el

at a speed of 2500. If it has an acceleration of 2, it will	Engine systems of Progress Level 6 create accelerations
take that ship 1,249 rounds (about ten hours) to slow downof up to 60 or 70 G, give or take. For routine travel, a Fu- to a speed of 2, which is pretty good for entering orbit. Thesion Age ship does not use all of its acceleration capaci-
end result: any ship trying to reach a particular planet is	ty-its' much more comfortable and convenient to use a
traveling at a speed of 10 to 20 when it's within 50 to 100 steady acceleration of 1 G or a little less, which also pro-

hexes of its destination, and it's still slowing down.
Table 4-3: Stopping Distance (Spd 10)
Acc Hexes	Rounds
145 hexes9221 hexes5312 hexes349 hexes356 hexes265 hexes2
  TABLE4-3 shows how many hexes a ship traveling at a speed of 10 needs to perform a straight deceleration to a speed of 1, and how many rounds it takes. In other words, a ship with an acceleration of 2 slowing down from i-nter

vides the accelerating ship with a reasonable simulation of gravity for most of the trip. In combat, however, a ship must employ accelerations that strain human and machine to their limits.

Protection from Acceler  ation
Accelerations of more than 2 G or so require special pro- tective measures for a ship's passengers and crew.
  Characters in normal seats or positions aurneprotect- ed. They may be injured or killed by extreme accelera- tion, but aren't at risk for damage from routine maneu- vers.
  Characters sealed into acceleration tanks and prepared with various drugs and mechanical devices apreotected

planetary travel must be at least 21 hexes from its de-stina against acceleration. All crew stations and passenger tion when it slows to speed 10, and it will take three more quarters are fitted to protect their occupants; donning G- rounds of deceleration to reach a speed of 1. For mos-t bat suits and preparing for extreme acceleration takes about

tle or encounter scenarios, you can say that the arriving ship begins at speed 10 at the appropriate distance from

10 minutes (or 2 game rounds for PL 6 combat).

the planet (although more cautious approaches are certainly possible).

Effects of Acceler  ation
The exact effects of acceleration naturally depend on just how much acceleration you're talking about.
3 G or less (Acc 0 to 0.2)N:o ill effects.

kind of punishment without changing the rules altog.ether
  At PL 7, acceleration compensators are part of basic en- gine design; the particle impulse and gravity induction drives are capable of thousands of gravities, but as long as the engine generates thrust, it also generates a protective

  3 to 9 G (Acc 0.2 to 0.5)P:rotected characters suffer no field that counteracts the tremendous acceleration of the penalties; unprotected characters suffer a +2 step penaltyengine. The gravitic redirector of PL 8 works in much the
to all actions.	same way.
  Any character attempting to move around the ship at an At PL 8, the inertial flux engine functions by instanta- acceleration of 3 G or more must attempt a Strength checnke.ously altering the inertial state of all matter on board the On a failure, the character suffers a short fall and sustainship at the same instant. Relative to the rest of the ship,

damage accordingly (seeABTLEP15 in the ALTERNITYPlay - er's Handboo)k.
10 to 25 G (Acc 1)P: rotected characters suffer no

the passengers experience no acceleration at all.
  At PL 9, the spatial compressor simply annihilates dis- tance around the ship, so that very modest accelerations

penalties. Unprotected characters can take no actions at aplrloduce enormous results. An outside observer might
and must attempt an Staminae-ndurancecheck each	record an acceleration of ten thousand G, but inside the
round, suffering 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 points of stun damage forship the same motion is experienced as a mild tug. an Amazing, Good, Ordinary, or Marginal success.

  26 to 40 G (Acc 2)P: rotected characters suffer a +2 step penalty to all actions (including all crew checks). Un-

R ELATIVITY

protected characters can take no actions at all and must aSth- ips moving at extremely high speeds begin to experience tempt an Staminae-ndurancecheck as described above at significant relativistic effects-time dilation, elongatio- n, in
a +3 step penalty.	crease in mass, and other phenomena that become apparent
41 to 60 G (Acc 3):Protected characters can take no ac-as a ship nears the speed of light.
tions at all and must attempt an Staminean-durancecheck	Most of the time, these effects are simply immeasurably
as previously described. crew checks are still possible at samall. (Heck, if you go for a walk and come back to your
+3 step penalty (the ship's computers take over). Unpro- house, there would be some infinitesimal difference between

tected characters die.
  61 to 90 G (Acc 4 or 5)P: rotected characters can take no actions at all and must attempt Staminean-durance

your perfectly accurate wristwatch and your perfectly -accu rate wall clock.) However, spaceships are capable of t-ravel ing at speeds so high that relativistic effects can really- mat

check at a +3 step penalty. crew checks are still possibleter. at a +5 step penalty. Unprotected characters die.
  91 G or more:No character survives, regardless of pro- tection.


Dilation


Starting and Stopping
Not all acceleration injuries are slow, crushing deaths. Crewmembers walking about the ship when the captain

The amount of time dilation, increase in apparent mass, or elongation observed aboard a ship traveling near light speed is proportional to just how close it is to light speed. While a tiny but measurable amount of dilation occurs at any v-eloci ty, we'll sum up the notable breakpoints. Dilation -is ex

suddenly decides to begin an unannounced 20-G decelerapr-essed as a ratio or multiplier, known as gamma. tion are liable to break arms, legs, spines, and bulkheads

as they're dashed against the nearest hard surface.

Table 4-4: Gamma

Characters with no warning of the impeding change areSpeedAU/hour%Cgsubject to falling damage for a short fall (3 to 9 G), medi-1000.181.1%1.0003um fall (10 to 25 G), long fall (26 to 40 G), or terminal fall12501.014%1.01(41 G or more). For this reason, most captains make a25002.028%1.04point of announcing maneuvers before they cut in the37503.042%1.1rockets.50004.056%1.262505.070%1.4Gravity Age  Trav el7500
81006.0
6.583%
90%1.8
2.3In the Gravity, Energy, and Matter Ages, most engine- sys87307.097%3.9tems provide compensation for acceleration or ignore -accel88297.198.1%5.1eration altogether. These engines are hundreds of times89997.23999.99%60.2more powerful than the fusion torches and ion engines of90007.24100%infthe Fusion Age, and there is simply no way that ordinaryhulls-let alone unprotected humans-could stand up to this For example, gamma is 1.4 for a ship moving at 70-per

cent lightspeed (or 5 AU per hour). If the ship travels for 10 hours at that rate, only 7.1 hours pass on board the ship (10 divided by 1.4 is 7.1). At 97 percent lightspeed (7
AU per hour) passengers on board the ship experience only
2.6 hours compared to the 10 hours that pass outsidse. It' theoretically possible for a ship to approach the speed of light so closely that millions of years would pass outside, while only hours passed inside.
  Gamma also affects a ship's acceleration value. Sin-ce ac celeration represents how much thrust the engines produce compared to the mass of the ship, you could reduce the ship's acceleration by the ratio. For example, a ship with an acceleration of 3 is traveling at a speed of 8,100 meg-ame ters per round (90 percent lightspeed). Normally the ship could increase its speed by 3 per round, but its curren- t ve locity reduces its acceleration to 1.3 (3 divided by 2.3 is 1.3). If the ship hits 97 percent lightspeed (gamma 3.9), its acceleration of 3 would be reduced to 0.76. Eventually, its acceleration becomes infinitesimal.

Time and Space
The dilation effect of extreme velocity poses some interesting questions for space travelers, especially in a game universe

What Is the Speed of Light?
In case you were wondering, the speed of light is about 300,000 kilometers per second...roughly one billion kilometers per hour. If you're maneuvering a ship on the megameter scale, a ship moving at the speed of light would travel 9 million kilometers-or 9,000 megam- e ters-per round.
  Most of the PL 7 or better engine systems described in this book have enough power to quickly reach this speed through constant acceleration. A ship with an-ac celeration of 3 could reach lightspeed in 3,000 rounds, or about 25 hours. But it doesn't work this wya. Relativ- ity rears its ugly head.
  As a ship accelerates toward lightspeed, its extreme velocity begins to cause dilation effects. In effect, as its velocity approaches the speed of light, its mass -ap proaches infinity. This means that it's impossible to reach the speed of light through simple acceleration, no matter how good an engine you have at your disposal.
  You can't accelerate to the speed of light, but you might go faster than light by means of a drive or device that takes you from one star to another star faster than light could actually travel the same distance.

where true faster-than-light travel is not possible but high- gamma relativistic travel is possible. Imagine a ship whose

much in a large but static galactic society. If nothing really changes over time other than the fact that your acq-uain

power plant and engines are powerful enough to accelerate tances get older and you get richer, you might not mind

to 99.99 percent lightspeed within a few hours of launch. It doesn't have an FTL drive and can't break the lightspeed barrier-but travelers on board that ship will feel like they did!
Let's say that the spaceship is traveling from Earth to

missing centuries of history as you journey from world to world. It's possible that spacefarers might form a distinctive sub-culture or segment of society, rootless vagabond- s ad mired, pitied, or even reviled by the people they serve.
The most difficult scenario is the middle case-worlds in

Tau Ceti, a Sol-like star about twenty light years from Earth.close contact that arneot static, where society advances and
If the ship traveled exactly at the speed of light, it would	technology increases immeasurably each time the heroes
take twenty years to make the trip. But the ship can't reachget off the boat in a new place. They grow more and more
light speed; nothing in the universe can. Instead, the ship antiquated as centuries and millennia spin by them, one
reaches a speed of 99.99 percent lightspeed. At a dilation day finding that their world is nothing like the world they ratio of 60.2, the twenty-year voyage would take about 120knew only a few weeks or months ago in their own time. days. At a gamma of 600 (call it 99.999 percent l-ight

speed), the trip would take about 12 days of shipboard time. Twenty years pass in the universal frame of reference

3D COMBAT

for only 12 days inside the ship.
What would this mean? If you're talking about alien

The ship combat rules presented in the first two chapters depict combat as a two-dimensional confrontation. Fr,ankly

worlds with little or no contact with each other, surprisingly this is a gross simplification made for the purpose of -keep

little. Each time the heroes visit a new system, the rest of the universe gets a little older, but they're only passing a few short weeks. Back home, friends and family live

ing game play fast-moving and fun. If this strikes you as
too simple, read on.
Adding the z-axis to your game doesn't materially affect

decades that their spacefaring loved ones don't experience.most of the steps in the sequence of play. The two places
Bank accounts and mutual fund accumulate years and	where three-dimensional positioning and movement matter
years of interest. Society changes, grows, perhaps becomesare in the movement phase and the fire phase. unrecognizable to the traveler who returns after a trip of

four or five decades that she experienced as less than a year. But as long as each new planet she visits isn't home (or someplace that can affect or be affected by her h-ome world) the time dilation means little to .her
  Even if the traveler journeys between worlds in close contact with each other, relativistic travel wouldn't mean

3D Position
Since each hexagon on the mapsheet represents a m- ega meter (1,000 kilometers), we'll arbitrarily divide a ship-'s al titude above or below the plane represented by the-map sheet into 1,000-kilometer increments too. Think of the- bat

48 tlefield as a stack of identical mapsheets set 1 hex width	neuvers available to a commander. (See "Maneuviners"

erence level or zero-level is the mapsheet you have spread out on your table to play out a ship combat, and a ship is

Climb or Div e

either above or below this reference level by some numberWhen a ship performs a climb or dive maneuver, it allocates

of megameters.

Indicating Ele va tion

some of its horizontal speed into vertical movemen-t. Al though it's not perfectly accurate, we'll simply say that th- is al lows the commander to split his ship's movement into a- hor izontal and a vertical component. For example, a ship with a

You might try small poker chips or tokens placed under thespeed of 4 dives; the captain could move 3 hexes forward

ship miniature or counter as a method for indicating- alti tude. Use white chips to indicate elevation above the-refer

and 1 hex down, 2 hexes forward and 2 hexes down, or 1 hex forward and 3 hexes down. The climb or dive ends at the

ence map-a miniature with six white chips under it is-actu end of the ship's current movement, although it could- cer

ally 6 MM above the reference level. Red chips indicate a position "under" the map in the exact same .way

tainly climb or dive again in following rounds.
Realistically, the ship could actually designate a new

You could also construct a clip stand scaled to your own climb rate or dive rate as a default part of its "straight"

map and miniatures. Clip stands are used for some- dog fighting games-it's a heavy hexagonal base that marks where the plane is on the map, while the plane itself is moved up or down a rod or dowel standing up from the
    base and marked in altitude increments.

Counting Range
To determine the range between two ships at differen-t lev

movement. However, for the sake of ease of play, we'll say that a ship completes its climb or dive in one round of movement, and climbs or dives again if it wants to keep gaining or losing elevation.

Roll
The roll maneuver allows a ship to "sideslip" one hex as it moves forward. In the 3D movement system, a ship may

els, you'll need to do a little math. First count the horizontaluse a roll to either gain or lose 1 megameter of elevation.
distance, as indicated by the hexes separating the two	It's really the same thing as a 1-hex climb or dive, but the
markers. Then, count the vertical distance indicated by theircinematics are a little different. chips. For example, a ship at elevation +6 MM and a ship

at +2 MM are separated by a vertical distance of 4 m-ega meters.
  Now, square the horizontal distance, square the vertical distance, and add them together. The actual distan-ce be

Turn and Loop
When a ship performs this maneuver,mitustgain or lose one megameter of elevation.

tween them is the square root of the sum. You're solving for the length of a right angle's hypotenuse. Pythagoras put it a little better: x2 + y2 = z2, where x is the horizontal distance,


3D Fir e

y is the vertical distance, and z is the "slant range" directly The major consideration for weapons fire in a 3D combat

between the two points.
Slant range = Square root of2(x+ y2)

system is how elevation affects arcs of fire. The principal arcs of fire defined inChapter 1: Basic Combagtain a new

  Let's say that the two ships above happen to be 7 hexescomponent in 3D combata-rget aspect(.The zero arc ig- away from each other horizontally, and 4 hexes away fromnores attitude rules.)
each other vertically:

Range = Square root of27+ 42 Range = Square root of 49 + 16 Range = Square root of 65 Range = 8.06 (round down to 8)
If the first ship fired on the second ship with no vertical

Target Aspect
A potential target may be in one of three possible aspects toward the attacking shiph:igh, flat,or low.
Flat:The horizontal separation between the firing ship

separation at all, the range would be 7 hexes. But the 4-hexand the target is greater than or equal to the vertical -sepa vertical difference increases the actual range of the attack toration. For example, a ship 5 hexes away on the mapsheet

8 hexes.


3D Mo vement

and only 3 hexes lower than the firing ship is a flat shot. A ship may fire normally on a target with a flat aspect.
  High: The vertical separation exceeds the horizontal- sep aration, and the target has a higher elevation than the firing

Obviously, moving in a three-dimensional battlefie-ld re quires rules for gaining or losing elevation. We'll handle

ship. The firing ship can't attack the target unless it has weapons that can fire into the high arc or it maneuvers to

this in the simplest manner possible, by expanding the- ma change its own attitude.

  Low: The vertical separation exceeds the horizontal separa- tion, and the target ship has a lower elevation than the firing

High and Lo w Arcs

ship. The firing ship can't attack unless it has weapons that canIn 3D combat, two new firing arcs are added to the six fire into the low arc or it maneuvers to change its own attitude.standard arcs (forward, aft, starboard, port, zero-star-
board, and zero-port): the high and low arcs.

Attitude
  
The high arc is defined as any hex whose vertical sepa- ration is at least one hex more than its horizontal separa-

This term describes the general orientation of the firing ship totion. For example, an External cruiser that is exactly one
its target. Is it level, climbing, or diving? A climbing ship can  hex higher than a Concord battleship but occupies the
shoot flat and still hit an enemy target that would otherwise besame horizontal hex would be in the battleship's high fir-

in the high arc; the target isn't reaollyver the firing ship if the firing ship is heading toward it straight-on.
   It should be difficult but possible for a ship to perform mi- nor attitude adjustments or spins to freely face in any orienta- tion for a shot. However, for the purposes of game play we'll

ing arc. Similarly, if the enemy ship was located in a hex five megameters higher and only two hexes distant hori- zontally, it would also be in the high arc.
  The low arc is exactly like the high arc, but in reverse. In the example above, the Concord battleship would be lo-

say that a ship must spend most of the game round pointing incated in the External cruiser's low arc.

the right direction to shoot. In other words, a ship can't ignore firing arcs by simply spinning left, right, up, and down as it moves.
Level:The firing ship did not make a maneuver that
  
Weapon Firing ArcsT: he high and low firing arcs are treated exactly like the other standard arcs for purposes of ship construction and designating arcs of fire for weapons. For example, a turret normally permits three firing arcs,

changed its elevation during the most recent movement phases. o a ship designer could designate those as the forward, Weapons firing into all standard arcs may only fire on targets port, and high arcs (a wing turret portside), or maybe the
with a flat aspect.	port, starboard, and low arcs (a belly turret midships).

Climbing:The firing ship gained elevation in the last move-

Universal TurretsA:

weapon turret can fire intfoour

ment phase. In its forward arc of fire, a climbing ship may firearcs if it's designated as a universal turret. One of the arcs

on targets with a flat or high aspect, and in its aft arc of fire, the ship may fire on ships with a flat or low aspecet.aWpons firing into other arcs can only fire on flat-aspect targets.
Diving:The firing ship lost elevation in the last movement

must be high or low; the costs is an additional 25% cost and space above and beyond a standard turret. In other words, a standard turret requires an additional 25% cost and space, and a universal turret requires an additional

phase. In its forward arc of fire, a diving ship may fire on tar- 50% cost and space beyond that of a standard mount for gets with a flat or low aspect. In its aft arc of fire, the ship maythe same weapon. SeCehapter 5: Ship Constructi.on
fire on targets with a flat or high aspect. Weapons firing into other arcs may only fire on flat-aspect targets.

50	CHAPTER 5: SHIP CONSTRUCTION
Designing a large spaceship is one of the most technically you're building this ship for; obviously, high-PL ships will
challenging feats a civilization, nation, or private enterprise have access to more compact and powerful equipment than

ever faces. Dozens of vital engineering systems from the ship's drives to its life support systems require extensive, thorough, and complete planning. Navigation, communica- tion, and sensor systems made up of thousands of distinct

low-PL ships.


Class and Hull

components and incredibly complex software must be in-	The second step in designing a ship is to decide, in general
stalled, tested, and calibrated. Systems particular to the ship'tserms, what hull size and type is going to best serve your mission and role-weapons, hangars, cargo transfer systemsp,urposes and budget. The hull is the single most expensive scientific instrumentation, and so on-require the same de- component of the ship construction process, but it serves as a
gree of care and attention. Finally, a crew must be assem- framework into which you can plug all the weapons and sys-
bled and trained in the operation of the tremendously com- tems you'll need for your ship to perform its basic mission.

plex piece of machinery with which they are entrusted. The entire process takes many months, and sometimes years.
  Fortunately, we don't have to concern ourselves with the exacting minutiae of spaceship design. For the purposes of this book, ship design basically boils down to a process of resource allocation. Given the constraints imposed by the selection of a particular hull, what is the best combination
  
Choosing a hull provides one of the first resources you'll need for ship construction: Hull Points.

Armor
The ship's primary defenses against enemy damage are its size and compartmentation. This is reflected by the

of firepower, sensor capability, maneuverability, and defenseship's damage track and by its toughness, or resistance to for that ship and its mission? There's no such thing as the enemy fire. The next line of defense is armor. Armor

perfect ship; a cruiser that has the armament, armor, and speed you think you need is probably going to end u-p be

negates some of the damage from each weapon that strikes the ship. It's a good idea to decide on the type and

ing much bigger than you thought it was going to when youweight of your ship's armor at this point, since armor

decided to design a light cruis.er

SHIP DESIGN CHECKLIST
Here's a quick checklist of how you go about designing a large ship with the rules in this chapter. The steps titled in

takes up some percentage of your ship's total hull points.

Pow er Plant
With a few exceptions, any spaceship must have the ability to generate power for its engines, weapons, sen-

italics are mandatory for any ship, regardless of its missionsors, and other critical components. Depending on the

or armament; other steps may be skipped, depending on what kind of ship you're building and the technology level of your setting.
1. Class and Hull Selection
2. Armor
3. Power Plant and Fuel
4. Engines
5. FTL Drive
6. Support Systems
7. Weapons
8. Defensive Systems
9. Command and Computers
10. Sensors and Fire Control
11. Hangars and Small Craft
12. Miscellaneous Installations
13. Adding it up

Prepar ation
It goes without saying, but the first thing you need to do is decide why you're building this ship and what parameters you're going to observe in the construction process. You should also decide what Progress Level and tech track

exact technology available to the shipbuilder, the power plant may require some kind of bulky and expendable fuel supply.

Engines	Hangars and Small Craft
Engines translate a ship's power into movement in normal Carriers and assault ships rely completely on their co-mple space. Some engines, such as chemical rockets or photon ment of small craft. In this step, you'll decide how much of
sails, operate with little or no relation to the ship's power	your spaceship is devoted to the storage, maintenance, and
plant. Most high-tech engines rely on a ship's ability to- gendeployment of smaller craft. erate massive amounts of ener.gy


FTL Driv e
The acronym 'FTL' stands for faster-than-light. If you want your spaceship to be astarship,you'll want to select an
FTL drive and install it in your hull. Generally, only one or two FTL techniques work in any given set of sci-fi assu- mp tions, so make sure you check with your Gamemaster or fellow players before deciding on aTLFsystem that may be available in your game.

Support Systems

Miscellaneous
A number of special capabilities are included in this catch- all category. The most common miscellaneous system is a ship's cargo capacity. Not all cargo ships are civilian- ves sels; assault ships need to carry vast amounts of military equipment to support their troops planetside.

Adding It Up
There are three main commodities you'll need to keep track of throughout the ship design process: hull points, m,oney and power points. Hull points represent the sheer size of

The support systems "finish off" the engineering part of shipthe hull and the systems you want to install therein. If the

design with life support, recycling, and other critica-l sys tems. It's a very good idea to purchase some life support for your ship. Crew and troop accommodations are in-clud ed in this step. Highly automated ships at high Progress

systems you install total too many hull points for your hull, you'll have to reevaluate your design choices. Money may or may not be a consideration for your campaign, but it's a good gauge of how much ship you're trying to build and

Levels (and many civilian ships at any PL) require minimalwhat kind of resources are necessary to manufacture-it. Fi crews. Assault ships, with their extensive troop lift cap,acity nally, many of your ship's most important systems demand
must reserve a great deal of space for troop berthing.	a source of power; you need to ensure that the ship's-pow
er plant is sufficient to power the installed systems.
Weapons

Choose the weapon systems you wish to install in the ship. There are five categories of weapons: beams, projectiles, missiles, and torpedoes, and special weapons. As wTitLh F

Assign Systems and Create Record Sheet

travel, some types of weapon border on the fantastic and may not be appropriate for your game.

Defensive Systems

Assuming that everything adds up, the last step of creating a ship is to create its damage diagram and fill in a permanent record form so that you don't lose all your hard work.

TECHNOLOGY

Unlike armor, which is based on a percentage of the hull, de-
fensive systems require power and some specific number of Before you begin building your ship, you should decide hull points. Defensive systems include shields, countermea- what Progress Level and technology types are appropriate

sures, damage control installations, and special defenses.

Command and Control
This is the brain of the spaceship. How well can it ga, ther process, and utilize information? These systems include

for your campaign. It's entirely possible for a campaign to feature a variety of Progress Levels; some navies might be constructed using the latest PL 9 technology, while others might be barely spaceworthy PL 6 fleets, limited to th-e de fense of their own home systems. It's not fair, but s-ome times PL 6 societies wind up fighting against mor-e ad

communications, command facilities, and-most impo- rtant vanced societies.

ly-the ship's main compu.ter

Sensors
  
In addition to the question of the overall technological level of a society, some cultures or races may specialize in certain types of related technologies. For example, control of gravity not only provides some outstanding engine systems,

In this step, you should build the ship's sensor suite and firebut it also leads to some sophisticated weaponry an-d de control systems. Detecting targets hundreds of thousands ofenses too. These related technologies are described by the kilometers away and effectively bringing the ship's we-apon"tech track" system, which codes each starship system
ry to bear require extensive sensor systems.	based on its parent technolo.gy

Progress Le vel
Progress Level is an abstract measurement of the te-chno

the universe makes impossible feats routine. Some PL 9 tech- nologies are included in case you want to design ships for a race or society with a special edge, but this level of technology

logical capability of a planet or civilization. It's a pretty goodgenerally exceeds the limits of classic space opera. indication of how effective ship systems are likely to be; in

general, a PL 7 engine is significantly better than a co-mpa rable PL 6 engine, a PL 7 weapon is better than a PL 6

Tech Track

weapon, and so on. The Progress Levels available for ship Not every society will develop every technology available in

construction are:
PL 5 (Information Age)T:he first space vessels become

the following system descriptions. While a hull of almost any size can be handled by any spacefaring race, not every

possible. This is the "real-world" technology level. Spa-cegoculture is going to master artificial gravity, or energy fields,
ing warships and viable interplanetary travel are still	or antimatter-based power generation. The tech trdaec-k
decades away, so PL 5 is not supported by these ship- con scribes certain suites of technology that fit together; f-or ex
struction rules.	ample, gravity tech makes possible artificial gravity, gravity-
  PL 6 (Fusion Age)F:usion power offers cheap, clean, and based weaponry such as the mass cannon, gravity i-nduc plentiful energy, making interplanetary travel practical and tion engines, and the stardrive.
affordable. Fusion Age ships can be effective warships, but Each ship system described in the rest of this chapter
most of the designer's time and effort goes toward creatingmay include a tech track code, indicating the type of-tech
a ship that can survive and maneuver in space; weaponry nology that must be available to make use of that system. If

is almost an afterthought.
  PL 7 (Gravity Age)C: ontrol of gravity and mastery of faster-than-light (TFL) travel make interplanetary flight a

no code appears, the technology is so basic athnaytspace- faring race, regardless of technological expertise, can build ships incorporating that system. Note that it's quite possible

routine matter, and interstellar travel cheap and easy. This for a particular race or culture to possess more than one of is the beginning of the classic space opera technology. Thethese technology tracks, possibly at different Progres-s Lev

Basic Rules assume PL 7 as the default for most games. PL 8 (Energy Age)T:echnologies capable of harnessing

els. For instance, an alien empire might have Gravity- Ma nipulation at PL 7, Dark Matter Tech at PL 8, and Matter

the most fundamental structures of the universe come into Coding at PL 6. (Unless otherwise stated, assume that most

existence. Warships are capable of spanning dozens or hundreds of light-years in a matter of days. The advent of

cultures have all technologies at the same PL.) The technology tracks are:

shield technologies make power, not weaponry, the key to a Gravity Manipulation (GT):he ability to create, project,
successful warship design.	and control fields of artificial gravity or negate the effects of
PL 9 (Matter Age)E: xtensive control over the very nature of naturally occurring gravi.ty
  Dark Matter Tech (D)W: e know of four fundamental forces in the universe: gravity, electromagnetics, the weak
nuclear force, and the strong nuclear force. For purposes of the ALTERNITYgame, we're assuming some tiny portion of the unseen mass that comprises 90 percent of the universe is comprised of a different kind of matter through which a fifth fundamental force can be harnessed. The decay of dark matter into "normal" matter releases immense amounts of energy, and a civilization with this technology can harness it to create mass reactors and weapons of tremendous powe.r
  Antimatter Tech (A)T: he efficient manufacture and s-tor age of antimatter makes a number of high-energy power and weapon systems practical.
  Matter Coding (M)H: ow does a particle "know" how to be a particle? How does it "know" how to interact with other particles? This technology is based on the principle that subatomic matter may operate under a kind of universal coding system that can be unraveled and manipulated to make matter behave as desired.
  Fusion Tech (F)I:t's possible to create fusion reactions with our current technology-the H-bomb is a great e-xam ple. Harnessing the power of fusion in safe, economical, and self-sustaining power plants is the next big step in the energy revolution.

  Quantum Manipulation (QQ):uantum Manipulation te-ch nology is based on the understanding of the forces tha-t con trol the interactions of the various subatomic particles. The tantalizing quantum-fluctuation (or zero-point) energy source represents the ultimate goal of this line of inq. uiry
  Matter Transmission (TA): civilization with this techno-lo gy has mastered the teleportation of matter from one point to another. Naturally, this has a number of military and commercial applications.
  Super-Materials (S)M: aterials technology is crucial to the design of hull and armor systems in the future. Ranging from tough composites to monofilaments and artificial -mate rials in which every atom has been nanoengineered for maximum strength, advanced materials make incredibly strong hulls possible.
  Psi-tech (P):Technology that harnesses the power of thought, psi-tech allows a civilization to change reality with willpower and superior mental skill.
  Energy Transformation (XE):nergy Transformation is nothing less than the ability to control the manifestation of matter and energy. A tiny amount of matter can be t-rans formed into an incredible amount of energy. At the higher progress levels, this technology provides the ability to- actu

What's a Class,	Really?
A class of ships consists of all the ships built to a co-m mon plan. Although some of the ships may be modified from this baseline later, they're essentially identical in all important details. For example, the U.S. Navy c-ur rently operates two major classes of destroyers: the Spruance-class ASW destroyers, and thAerleigh Burke- class Aegis destroyers. There are several advantages to finding a plan that works and then sticking to it; the cost per unit drops dramatically when you don't have to come up with new plans, systems, and manufacturing processes for each new ship you build. In addition, crew training and tactical doctrines can be applied more e-as ily to lots of different ships instead of one at a time.
  Typically, an enemy observer can identify the class of a particular warship by its visual profile or its sensor and weapon suite, but unless he has access to some kind of intelligence information, the exact identity of the ship is rarely obvious. In other words, it's pretty easy to id-en tify a Spruance-class destroyer, but much harder to fi-g ure out that the ship in question is theFoster, Hayler, or O'Bannon.

Light Ships

ally change the type of ener.gy
Computer Tech (C)W: hile any spacefaring civilization will

Ranging from light freighters and attack ships on up t-o de
stroyer leaders, light ships are usually too big to be carried

possess some amount of computing technology, extremely aboard other vessels. Ships such as corvettes and de-stroy

sophisticated nanotechnologies, sensors, and contro-l sys tems fall under this catego.ry

STEP 1: CLASS AND HULL

ers are the most numerous true warships; a planetary fleet may include hundreds of these vessels.

Medium Ships

The first step in building a starship is selecting a ship classCruisers, light carriers, and large merchantmen are-com

and an appropriate hull type. For our purposes, a class is simply a very broad measurement of the ship's general size, toughness, and firepower, while a hull is a fairly- spe cific beginning point for the shipbuilding process.

Class

mon medium ships. They screen heavy and super-heavy vessels, and are capable of executing detached operations for extended periods of time.

Heavy Ships
A heavy ship such as a battleship or fleet carrier is a national

Ship classes include small craft, light, medium, heavy, and investment. One or two serve as the centerpieces of most task
super-heavy. Each of these broad classes includes a n-um  forces and operational groups; more than a dozen in the same
ber of specific hull types that you may choose from. Fo- r explace at the same time represents an overwhelming amount of ample, medium ships include the light cruiser, heavy -cruis force-a sector fleet ready for a major engagement.
er, and the armored cruis.er


Small Craft
The smallest warships are, of course, fighters and other small craft. Typically, these ships are small enough to be carried aboard medium or heavy vessels; a battleship will frequently carry several launches or scouts, while a true carrier may embark hundreds of fighters and strike ships. Note thatformation combartules may be used in place of individual controlling the movement and attacks of each fighter involved in a squadron-sized battle; sCeheapter 1: Basic Combaftor details.

Super-Heavy Ships
Not every game will feature super-heavy ships; these ti- tans are each a fleet in themselves, carrying dozens or hundreds of small craft and mounting weaponry that can destroy a heavy cruiser in one hit. Be warned: building a super-heavy ship can take a long time!

Hull Selection
Choose the hull type you want to use for your spaceship. While we've attached some very specific names to these hull types, there's no reason you couldn't design any kind

of ship using any kind of hull. For example, if you want to design a destroyer-sized ship that embarks a single flight

Fast Transpor t

of four strike fighters, you could choose a destroyer hull despite the fact that you're buildingmain" i-carrier." Simi-

Designed to carry small amounts of high-bulk cargo such as heavy machinery or vehicles, the fast transport

larly, a heavy cruiser hull might be used to build a surveysees service in the same kind of work as the fast cruiser, a fast freighter, a command ship, or an orbital as- freighter.
sault ship. The name is simply a placeholder.


Launch
This is a boat, pinnace, or gig designed to simply move

Hauler
The hauler is a spacegoing tug that drags heavy, non-pow ered loads and modules. Most haulers are fitted with big

small amounts of people from one point to another. They'repower plants and huge engines, at the expense of carg- o ca

rarely armed or armored.

Courier
  The courier is a more robust ship capable of extended operation away from its base. Few are drive-capable.

Trader
The smallest common commercial hull, the trader (or tradesman) generally carries a mix of small, high-value loads, personnel, and information or mail.

Fighter
Designed for action against other small craft, fighters lack the punch to be very effective against large targets unless they've been designed to carry bombs or torpedoes.

Strike Fighter

pacity and crew quarters.

Industrial
Industrial ships include a mining ship, mobile outpost, or similar vessel intended to carry very specialized machin- ery for a specific mission. Industrial hulls are rarely armed.

Escor t
Escorts are a long-endurance patrol craft employed for a variety of duties, including the protection of merchant-ship ping and remote bases. A typical escort ship is about 50 to 70 meters long and weighs 1,000 tons. A crew of 30 to 40 is normal, although a handful could operate the ship for a short time. Gunboats or missile boats could fall into th-is cat egory.

Cor vette

Also known as the heavy fighter, the strike fighter is usuallyBasically a larger version of the escort ship, the corvette armed with a bomb or torpedo capable of seriously da-magserves as both a gunboat and fleet escort. These are the ing a large warship or tough ground target. It may or may smallest military vessels expected to operate independently not be equipped with weapons suitable for defending itself in wartime.
against enemy fighters.


Cutter

Frigate
A military vessel used for scouting and escort duties, the

Many system patrol craft or police vessels fall into thi-s cat frigate is primarily intended to screen larger vessels

egory. The cutter is rarely drive-capable. Note that a- mili tary ground assault ship might fall into this hull size.

Scout

against small craft attack. A frigate is roughly 100 to 120 meters long and weighs about 2,000 to 3,000 tons, carrying a crew of about 100 men and women.

The largest small craft, a scout is designed to cover space and

Destr oy er

locate enemies without engaging in serious combat. A scout- ship is 40 to 50 meters long and masses 100 to 200 tons.

Fast F reighter

Destroyers take their name from the torpedo-boat de- stroyers of the late 19th century. They're integral to the defense of a task force, screening it against small craft and attack ships. Destroyers are often armed with a one- or two-shot weapons useful against much larger ships.

Fast freighters are a commercial hull generally employedA destroyer is usually about 150 to 200 meters long
in small, frequent runs, such as carrying supplies to	and masses about 8,000 metric tons. It carries a crew of
small outposts and bases. The fast freighter usually car- 150 to 200. ries some minor defensive armament.

Table 5-1a:	Military Hulls	55





Table 5-1b:	Civilian Hulls

Hull TypeHull Pts.5%10%ToughTargetMvrswmcCrewCostSmall Craft
Launch
8
0.5
1
(Gd)
+3 steps
4
4
4
2
1
2
$300 KCourier1611.5(Gd)+2 steps488424$400 KTrader2412(Gd)+2 steps41212636$500 KFast freighter321.53Sm+2 steps41616848$600 KFast transport4024Sm+2 steps4202010510$800 KLight Ships
Hauler
72 (+7)
3
7
Sm
+1 step
3
18
18
9
5
18
$1 MIndustrial96 (+10)510Sm+1 step3242412624$2 MMedium Ships
Medium freighter
240 (+48)
12
24
Lt
0
2
30
30
15
8
30
$20 MClipper360 (+72)1836Lt0245452312360$40 MMedium transport480 (+96)2448Lt-1 step26060301560$60 MHeavy Ships
Tanker
720 (+216)
36
72
Md
-1 step
1
45
45
23
12
90
$100 MLiner840 (+252)4284Md-1 step153532714840$150 MHeavy transport 1280 (+384)
Super-heavy Ships64128Md-2 steps180804020160$200 MSuper-freighter 2400 (+1200)120240Hv-3 steps075753819300$400 MColony transport3600 (+1800)180360Hv-4 steps011311357293600$1000 M
  Hull Points:The number of hull points available in this type, representing its capacity for installing systems. The -first num ber is the basic hull point total, the number in parenthesis is the bonus hull point total.
Tough:The ship's toughness rating. Note that some ships have Good toughness, one step less than Small Craft. Target:The ship's basic resistance modifier to enemy fire, based on its size and maneuv.erability
Maneuver:The ship's maneuverability class.
  5% and 10%:This is the number of hull points a system requiring 5 or 10 percent of the hull requires. This information is simply a shortcut to save you time and effort.
S, W, M, C:The ship's Stun, Wound, Mortal, and Critical damage tracks.
Crew:For information purposes only, a general estimate of how many crewmen a typical ship of this type carries. Cost:The cost of the hull, in credits, Concord dollars, or the appropriate currency for your campaign.

Medium F reighter
The medium freighter usually carries containerized cargo. Most operate in regular runs between densely populated systems.

Clipper
This is a small liner or personnel transport intended for passenger use, not heavy cargo. Many clippers are fitted with top-notch engines for the best possible speed.

Medium  Transpor t
Medium transports are similar to medium freighters, but they are fitted for specialized cargoes such as vehicle decks, liquid or gas tanks, or bulk holds.

Light Cruiser
The light cruiser is a warship that serves several roles. It may be part of a task force, escorting capital ships; it may

a large number of passengers, usually in some degree of luxury. A liner is about 400 meters in length and weighs in at 60,000 to 90,000 tons. The crew numbers about 200, not counting the hotel and restaurant staff, which might be as many as 1,000 more.

Heavy Transpor t
The heavy transport is designed to move a huge amount of specialized cargo such as bulk freight, containerized freight, or roll-on/roll-off vehicle storage.

Battlecruiser
The battlecruiser is a formidable warship that sacrifices weight of armor in exchange for speed. Its heavy weapons can make short work of any smaller vessel, and it can- usu ally outrun anything big enough to stand up to it in a fair fight.

Battleship

operate independently as a scout and raider; and finally, it The mainstay of many stellar navies, the battleship is -heav may serve in diplomatic and scientific tasks. Light cruisers ily armed and armored, although not very maneuverable. frequently have an outstanding endurance and can operateBattleships serve as the backbone of any battle fleet. The with little or no base support for months on end. An escort average battleship is roughly 400 to 500 meters in length

carrier or assault transporctould be built on a light cruiser hull.

Heavy Cruiser

and masses about 150,000 tons, with a crew of about 2,000 men and women.

Fleet Carrier

Generally considered the smallest capital ship, a heavy cruis-Designed to carry large numbers of strike craft and -inter er is a serious warship. It can outfight anything it can catch, ceptors, the fleet carrier has the ability to launch dev-astat
and outrun anything it can't outfight. A typical heavy cruiser ing attacks from millions of kilometers away. Most are very

is about 250 to 300 meters in length and masses about 50,000 metric tons. It carries a crew of 500 to 1,000.

Armored Cruiser

lightly armed, relying on their escorting vessels to defend them against attack.

Super-F reighter

These vessels often serve as the centerpiece of a raiding orThe largest ships built for routine commercial purposes, the

patrolling task force, especially if heavier warships are in short supply. Many armored cruisers are configured for task force command functions; the command cruiser is a fairly common variant of this hull type. A light carrier or assault carrier could easily fit into a ship of this hull type.

Tanker
A large civilian hull intended for the transport of large quantities of gases or liquids. While other forms of cargo storage may be installed, most ships of this size carr-y wa ter, hydrogen, petrochemicals, or oxygen.

Liner
This is a full-sized passenger ship. While any vessel this

super-freighter can be fitted with tanks or other specialized cargo facilities to make it into a super-tanker or super- transport.

Colon y Transpor t
This colossal ship is designed to haul everything a new colony needs to a new star system. Thousands upon-thou sands of colonists with heavy machinery, prefabricated buildings, equipment, and supplies can fit within its- cav ernous storage decks.

Dreadnought
The mightiest ships found in the battle lines of a stellar navy, dreadnoughts are titans armed with awesome- fire

size must carry some cargo, the liner specializes in movingpower and impregnable defenses. A dreadnought is around

800 to 1,200 meters long and weighs about 600,000 to 1,000,000 tons. Typically, a crew of 4,000 to 5,000 i-s re quired.

Super-Carrier
Like the fleet carrier, the super-carrier is designed sp-ecifi

Hull Points
Your choice of hull type provides you with the first critical pieces of information about your ship. First and foremost is the ship's hull point score. This measures how much room the hull contains for all the critical systems it must contain, from weapons to crew quarters. Hull points are also crucial

cally to operate large numbers of small craft. A super--carri for building the ship's damage track when you're done with

er might have an air wing of 200 to 300 interceptors and strike craft.

Super-Dreadnought
Sometimes found serving as fleet command ships or- flag

your ship design.

Economy of Scale
Larger ship hulls can be fitted with more systems than their size would otherwise indicate. There are several reasons

ships, the super-dreadnought is roughly twice the size of itsfor this: First, the square-cube law dictates that squaring an

smaller namesake.

Fortress Ship
The fortress ship combines the best features of the d-read nought and the super-carrier. It is armed with an im-pres

exterior dimension will cube the volume, so that as a hull gets a little longer and a little wider, the volume of space enclosed in the hull increases at a much faster rate-. Sec ond, many systems take up more space as they ar-e de signed for a higher capacity, but they don't take upproa- portionalamount of extra space. For example, crew q-uar

sive main battery, and it embarks hundreds (or maybe eventers for 400 hands aren't twice as big as crew quarters for

thousands) of small craft, too. A fortress ship might be 2,500 to 4,000 meters in length and weigh as much as

200 hands. This is because things like washrooms,- pas sageways, mess decks, and lounges don't need to be- dou

3-5 million metric tons. Crew and passengers could easily bled to handle twice as many people. Even things like-pow approach 100,000 men and women. Like any super-heavyer plants and engine systems become more efficient in size.
military ships, fortress ships are national assets that serve	To reflect this, light ships have 10% more hull points than
as the centerpieces of sector defense fleets; they're almost they "should" have, medium ships have 20% more, heavy always accompanied by an escort of dozens of cruisers andships have 30% more, and super-heavy ships have 50%

destroyers.

Firepo w er and  Toughness
The first thing determined by the ship's class is its to- ugh

more. These bonus hull points are represented AoBnLET5-1
in parenthesis. These bonus hull points don't add to the ship's damage track, and they don't count for calculations based on percentages of the ship. They're just free hull points.
For example, a battle cruiser has 1,000 hull points,

ness. Weapons increase or decrease in effect based on theplus an additional 300 hull points for economy of scale.

kind of target they're used against. This is an extension of the rules for weapon firepower and target toughness- pre sented in theALTERNITYcore rulebooks; consider the f-ire power and toughness scale to extend as described here:

Ordinary Good
Amazing =	Small Craft Light Medium Heavy Super-heavy

This means that a weapon of heavy firepower is one

If a system requires 1 hull point per 20 hull points of ship, or 5 percent of the ship's hull, only the base 1,000 hull points are used for this calculation. In this case, the system takes 50 hull points-even though 5 percent of a 1,300 hull point ship would require 65 hull points, not
50. The cost of the system and its power demands would be based on the size of the system actually installed (50 hull points).
  The rule for economy of scale means that large ships can afford proportionally more space for "options" such as weapons, defensive devices, or additional crew quarters than a smaller ship. Of course, large ships are als-o ex tremely expensive, so it's not really more efficient to build one big ship than it is to build a number of smaller ones.

firepower grade above a target of medium toughness, two But you can definitely use the same space more efficiently
firepower grades above a target of Light toughness, and	in one hull than you can in ten smaller ones with the same
five grades above a target of Ordinary toughness. This hastotal of hull points. drastic effects on a weapon's effectiveness against targets of

different toughness, as describedCihnapter 1: Basic Com- bat.

Damage  Track
Finally, the choice of hull also provides the ship's damage track-the number of stun, wound, mortal, and critical

points. For small craft, the stun point score is equal to half the ship's hull points; for light ships, one-quarter; for m- edi um ships, one-eighth; for heavy ships, one-sixteenth; and for super-heavy ships, one-thirty-second.
Ships gain proportionally fewer damage points as they

Cerametal
Combining the heat-resistant qualities of tough ceramics with the ductile strength of metal, cerametal armor offers a good compromise between protection and econ.omy

increase in size because large ships are, in some ways, just as fragile as small ships. A typical ship hull includes -thou sands of kilometers of duct work, piping, and conduits, plus


Neutronite

hundreds of thousands of kilometers of wiring. Damage in Advanced materials technologies lead to the creation of artifi- one area frequently causes secondary damage somewherecially dense materials that can withstand enormous forces. else, through cascading system failures and decompressionN. eutronite is a tough steel alloy into which a "weave" of free
A ship's wound point score is equal to its stun point	neutrons has been pressed. It is incredibly massive, weighing
score; its mortal score is equal to half its stun score; and itsabout five times more than a similar volume of lead. critical score is equal to half its mortal score.

STEP 2: ARMOR
The level of armor you decide to install in your new ship design will affect the durability you have available for all other installed systems. Like all other installed systems, a ship's armor takes up hull points.
Light armor takes up no hull points.
  Medium armor requires hull points equal to 5 percent of the ship's total hull point score.
  Heavy armor requires 10 percent of the ship's hull points.
  Super-heavyarmor requires 20 percent of the shsip' hull points.
  Armor protects a ship against the effects of enemy fire, reducing the damage of hits sustained by the ship.

Allo y

Reactiv e
A forerunner of the more advanced nanofluidic armo-r, re active armor consists of layers of insulating gel or -com pressed gas between cerametal sheets. High-veloci-ty im pacts and energy beams may burn through the armo-r be fore it can dissipate the impact or heat of an intense.blow

Crystallis
This sophisticated armor consists of a crystalline lattice that absorbs phenomenal amounts of energy. While it is not particularly effective against projectiles and other massive weapons, it is the finest energy protection available.

Nanofluidic
Consisting of a thick layer of gel-like fluid sandwiched in a neutronite structure, nanofluidic armor is "smart" armor-it

Composed of carefully fitted belts or plates of very tou-gh alconcentrates at the point of impact to blunt physical blows,

loys such as vanadium steel, alloy armor is reasonably cheap and effective.

Polymeric

and circulates around heat sources to dissipate energy. It is the most effective armor available.

STEP 3: POWER PLANT

Polymeric armor is made up of advanced polymers, like- carThe heart of any ship is its power plant. It takes vast
bon fiber and high-grade fiberglass. It is relatively cheap andamounts of power to drive a ship through space, energize

light, but doesn't offer tremendous protection.

Reflectiv e
Consisting of dense, highly polished plates of metal, r-eflec

its weaponry and defenses, and supply heat and gravity. An under-powered ship may have dozens of deadly weapons, but no capacity to get them to the fight or employ them all once it's there.
The ship's power plant supplies one of the three basic

tive armor is effective against simple energy weapons. It iscommodities you'll want to keep track of as you build your

quickly defeated by more advanced weapo.nry

ship: Power. (The other two commodities are hull points and money, in case you forgot.) Many systems require a specified amount of power to function, so you'll want to make sure that you know whether or not your ship has enough power points to make everything you deem im- por tant work at the same time.
  Power plants are rated by how many power points they produce per point of durability. For example, if you're -build ing a 10-durability fighter, you might decide to install a mass reactor of 3 durability. This generates 7.5 power

59





* Heavy armors cannot be installed on small craft.
! Super-heavy armors cannot be installed on small craft or light ships.

Tech:The technology track required for this type of armor. If two technologies are listed, either will suffice. LI, HI, En:The armor's protective value against Low Impact, Hi Impact, and Energy attacks, resp. ectively
  Hull: The amount of the ship's hull points required by armor of this weight. Refer to the hull table for the number of hull points each percentage equals (2.5% is half of 5%, rounded normally).
  Cost per Hull PointE:ach hull point allocated to armor costs this much money. If the armor installation takes less than 1 hull point, use a minimum cost of 1 hull point worth of ar.mor



points for the ship (round up to 8), and costs 600,000.
  Some power plants can't be miniaturized past a certain point and are unavailable for minimal installations. This is expressed as a minimum size for the power plant. Some power plants may also have a maximum size, indicating that the technology just isn't suited for extremely larg-e ap
  
For example, one large mass reactor capable of gen- erat ing 10 points of power requires 4 durability points (each durability point provides 2.5 points of power). This ins-talla tion costs 100,000 for the reactor, plus 100,000 for each of the four durability points associated with the reactor-a total of 500,000. If you bought this as four one-durability mass

plications. However, you can get around the maximum sizereactors, you'd pay the base cost times four, plus the-dura

limitation by installing multiple small power plants-power from all sources counts for the ship's total.

bility cost again, for a total of 800,000. Note that some power systems are difficult to enlarge, and have a relatively

Since you're the designer, you can decide whether -multi high cost per durability point, while other systems can be

ple durability points spent on your power plant make up one big power plant, or several small power plants-scat tered around the ship. The advantage of several small plants is that your ship is somewhat more resistant to-dam age-it's hard to knock out all of your power at one shot. However, it's more expensive to build a ship this.way

easily scaled up and have a low cost per durability point.

Fuel Tanks and Refueling
At higher Progress Levels, most power plants require-refu eling only at infrequent intervals. Their fuel is either -inex

60	Table 5-3:  Pow er Plants



Tech:The technology track necessary to produce this power system.
Pow:The amount of power produced by a power plant of 1 hull point. Fractions round normally, so a 2-hull point antimatter reactor (3.0 power produced per hull point) produces 6 power points.
Base Cost:The cost for each separate power plant installed.
Cost/Hull Point:The cost for each hull point of the power plant, cumulative with the cost for each new plant. Min Size:The smallest power plant possible, in hull points.
Max Size:The largest power plant possible, in hull points.
Fuel:Whether or not the power system requires additional fuel tankage. Fuel Cost:The cost per hull point of fuel purchased.
Efficiency:The number of power-days that can generated by 1 hull point of fuel. For example, one hull point of fuel provides 200 power-days for a fusion generator of 1 hull point size, or 20 power-days for a fusion generator of 10 hull points.

haustible or needs to be replaced only when the entire shipa fission or fusion generator converts the energy of atomic

is overhauled. However, many PL 6 power plants require fuel tank in addition to the power systems pro. per
  The amount of fuel a ship carries is up to you, but the major consideration here is enduran. cIneother words, how

bonds into heat energy which is then transformed into- elec tricity, or some other easily used energy form.
  Most of these power systems actually carry fuel of one kind or another, even if no fuel tank is required. A fission

long can the power plant operate on one tank of fuel? Thisgenerator doesn't need thousands of gallons of water, but it

is measured by the fuel tank's total power-d.aIyf sa fuel
tank holds 100 power-days, it can operate a power plant that generates 1 point of power for 100 days, 2 points of power for 50 days, 20 points of power for 5 days, and so on. If your design calls for 10 power points to run its major systems, it's a very good idea to purchase multiple fuel tanks (or one big one) so that your ship will operate for at least a couple of weeks without refueling.

Pow er Systems
With the possible exception of the quantum cell, a power generation system doesnc'treateenergy. Instead, itrans-

does need some amount of uranium or plutonium which is consumed over time. The duration of a typical plant and its refueling costs are addressed in each power system- de scription.

Solar Cell (PL 6)
The solar cell converts light and heat energy from a nearby star into shipboard power through large banks of high-ly ef ficient photovoltaic cells and heat exchangers. WithinU1 A (150 million kilometers) of a Sol-type star, the solarscell' power generation capacity increases by 50 percent;-simi larly, at a distance of more than 5 AU from a Sol-type, star

formsenergy from one type to another, more usable, type. the solar cell's power generation capacity drops by 50- per
A steamship's boiler transforms the energy stored in the	cent. For example, a cruiser equipped with 40 durability
chemical bonds of its fuel oil into heat energy, which is thenpoints of solar cells normally generates 40 points of power; transformed into kinetic energy through a turbine. Sim,ilarlythis increases to 60 power points in the inner portion of a

star system, and drops to 20 power points in the outer- por similar to radioactive decay in which energy is released by	61
power drop-off to 2 AU and 10 AU, while very small stars matter reactor, the mass reactor requires no fuel tank; the (class K and M) change these figures to 0.5 AU and 2 AU. dark matter and its containment device is already included.
The mass reactor requires refueling about once every

Fission Gener ator (PL 6)
Also known as an atomic or nuclear power plant, th-e fis sion generator extracts energy from a controlled cha-in re action of uranium or plutonium. Fission generators require heavy shielding, so small installations are very difficult.
However, the technology is easy to apply to large ins-talla tions.

six months, at a cost equal to 5,000 per hull point of the power plant.

Tachyonic Collider (PL 7)
Tachyons are particles that move faster than the speed of light. The tachyonic collider slows these particles and- har nesses their energy. While the collider is expensive and it

A fission generator's fuel rods last approximately two to doesn't provide as much power as other power systems at

four years, and then must be replaced at a cost of 50,000 per hull point of the power plant.

Fusion Gener ator (PL 6)
A fusion generator harnesses the power of nuclear fusion to create shipboard power. A containment device "bottles" the reaction in magnetic fields, since the generator's core

this progress level, it has one significant advantage: It-does n't require any fuel at all.

Dynamic Mass Reactor (PL 8)
Basically a refinement of the PL 7 mass reactor, th-e dy namic mass reactor accelerates the decay process, r-eleas ing more energy than its predecessor. It's also a smaller

burns at temperatures as hot as the surface of a star. F- ortuand safer installation.

nately, most fusion generators are designed to fail-safe in the event of damage.
  
The dynamic mass reactor requires refueling once every six months, at a cost equal to 10,000 per hull point of the

The fusion generator uses hydrogen for fuel, but like thepower plant. For example, a dynamic mass reactor of 30

cold fusion reactor, this is often stored as w.ater

Grav-Fusion Cell (PL 6)

durability points costs 300,000 to refuel.

Matter Con verter (PL 8)

Based on a fraal device, the grav-fusion cell employs artificialThis device produces energy through the total conversion of gravity fields to contain and enhance the performance of a fu-matter. Literally anything can be used as fuel. While the

sion reaction. It's otherwise similar to the fusion generator.

Antimatter Reactor (PL 7)
The antimatter reactor annihilates particles of antimatter to

matter converter is expensive, it produces an immense amount of power and requires no significant fuel source.

Quantum Cell (PL 8)

create vast amounts of power. Like the fusion generator, it Harnessing the Holy Grail of energy sources-the quantum requires some very careful containment procedures, and a fluctuation or zero-point energy observed in vacuum-the significant portion of the generator's output must be devotedquantum cell produces an enormous amount of energy

to maintaining the magnetic fields that insulate its fuel source from its surroundings. No fuel tank is required-the antimatter and its containment device are included in the durability cost and price of the reac.tor
  The antimatter reactor requires refueling about once per three to five years, although running at a minimal power configuration (nothing more than life support) could extend this to ten or fifteen years between fueling. Antimatter -is ex pensive; refueling the reactor costs half the amount of-mon ey spent on the power plant at the time of its construction.

Mass Reactor (PL 7)
Dark matter technology presumes that nonbaryonic dark matter may have properties unknown to 20th centur-y sci

from no fuel source at all.

Design Tip: Pow er
Assuming you're using an average power system-y,sa mass reactor-you probably want to devote about 10 to 15 percent of your ship's hull points to its power plant. (Fuel tanks would run another 5 to 10 percent, if nec-es sary.) This should give you plenty of power points for all of your engines, weapons, and defenses. Under-pow- er ing a ship is a real nuisance, since you'll have to decide which systems need to be powered during each round of combat. Providing a ship with more power than it needs is safer, since you can take damage to the power plant and not lose the ability to fight effectivye,l but it may waste hull space and money that could be better spent elsewhere.

ence. Specifically, dark matter can undergo a decay process

Singularity Gener ator (PL 9)
The singularity generator is an incredibly powerful device
  
Note that all ships are assigned a Maneuverability Class based on the hull type, which is a measure of how often they can make course changes during a combat roupnrod,-

that taps the power of a small black hole. It's not a ge-nera vided they have sufficient acceleration remai.nEinnggines
tor so much as an extremely capacious battery, but th-e en determine acceleration, but maneuverability is based on the

ergy contained in a tiny black hole is staggering.
Over the course of years, the singularity will shrink as it

size of the ship.
Acceleration is normally measured in Mpp, or meg-ame

"evaporates,"or loses energy; the singularity generator must ters per phase per phase. An acceleration of 1 Mpp means be refueled by the creation of a new black hole. A singulari-that the ship can change its velocity by 1 megameter per

ty generator lasts for 10 to 15 years before refueling is re- quired. Refueling costs an amount of money equal to half the cost of the power plant at the time of construction.

STEP 4: ENGINES

phase (roughly 1,000 kilometers per hour) in a single phase of acceleration. Some low-tech engines are instead rated in KPH per phase, or kilometers per hour per phase. An acceleration of 30 PKH per phase is roughly equal to 1 G; powerful engines are capable of thousands of Gs.

Without engines, a ship can't go anywhere. Many small ships rely on their mobility and maneuverability as their first (and

Engine Fuel Requirements

sometimes only) line of defense against enemy fire. Engine Several engine types require some kind of fuel tanks,
systems consume power points created by the ship's power above and beyond the fuel requirements for the ship's plant and convert them into acceleration. Like armor, engine power plant. Each hull point of fuel contains a certain

systems are proportional to the size of the ship and require the devotion of some percentage of the ship's hull points to reach the designated breakpoints of effectiveness.

number of thrust-days for a 1-hull point engine; this is the number of days the engine could operate continuously on 1 hull point of fuel. Engines with 2, 3, or more hull points




Table 5-4:  Engines

Min	Base	Cost/	Acceleration Rating at...
Engine	Tech Pow Size	Cost.	Hull	5%	10%	15%	20% 30% 40% 50% Eff. Cost
Progress Level 6: Fusion AgePlanetary thruster-1.01$200 K$50 K0.1*0.25*0.5*1*-	-	-	10  $10 KPhoton sail--5$500 K$50 K--0.02*0.05*0.1*0.15* 0.2* 0.25* -	-Fusion torch-0.333$500 K$100 K0.5*1*1.5*2*3*	4*	5*	200 $1 KIon engineS0.52$800 K$200 K--0.5*1*1.5*2*	3*	4*	400 $5 KProgress Level 7: Gravity AgeParticle impulse	-0.754$500 K$300 K0.51.01.522.534-	-Induction engine G1.02$1 M$500 K1234568-	-Progress Level 8: Energy AgeInertial flux engine X1.01$2 M$500 K23456810-	-Gravitic redirector G0.673$3 M$1 M2468101216-	-Progress Level 9: Matter AgeSpatial compressorT	2.0	4	$1.5 M	$200 K 3	6	9	12	15	18	20	-	-

* Acceleration on PL 6 game scale; see Chapter 2.
Tech:The technology type required to build an engine of this type.
  Power:The number of power points required by each hull point assigned to this engine. For example, a 30-hul-l point fu sion torch requires 10 power points to operate.
Min Size:The smallest number of hull points that can be assigned to this system. Base Cost:The cost for an engine installation of this type.
Cost/Hull:The cost per hull point assigned to this engine; cumulative with the base cost.
Acceleration rating at..T.:he ship's acceleration for an installation comprising 5-50% of its overall hull. For example, a 300-hull point cruiser with 60 hull points assigned to its engines uses the 20% column. Acceleration figures are given in megameters per turn unless otherwise indicated.
Fuel EfficiencyT: he number of thrust-days provided by one hull point of engine fuel. Engines of more than 1 hull point burn fuel at a correspondingly faster rate, so a 20 hull point fusion torch burns 20 thrust-days of fuel in one day of continuous thrust.
Fuel Cost:The cost to purchase 1 hull point of fuel for this engine type.

will burn fuel two, three, and so on times faster than the figure listed.
  The fuel use figure assumes more or less continuous maximum thrust. Naturally, a ship that spends three weeks drifting without firing its engines consumes no fuel at all.

Engine System Descriptions
Not all engines are created equal. Low-tech engines may take hours, days, or weeks of continuous acceleration to

ship's main drives must be shut down to make planetfall. The most common varieties are the scramjet, chemical rocket, or powered airfoil. The exact form doesn't matter.
  The planetary thruster requires either fuel or power, but not both. You can choose to install a standard fuel tank, or to make sure that the ship has enough power available to run a planetary thruster at need.

Fusion Torch (PL 6)

build up to a speed that a high-tech engine can match in a This engine is basically a fusion reactor with one wall of matter of two or three phases. When you select an engine the magnetic bottle missing; the exhaust is incredibly hot

system for your starship, record the engine's acceleration rating on your ship record sheet and assign the engines to

plasma.
The fusion torch is intended for space-only work; its

one or more hit locations. See the later part of the chapter exhaust stream would slag anything it landed on and in-

for more information.

Photon Sail (PL 6)
This device is an immense but incredibly fragile foil s-truc ture only a few molecules thick. It uses light pressure from a nearby star or laser drive station for its motive force. Its acceleration rates drop by 50% if the ship is more than 5 AU distant from the system's s.tar
  The sail can be wrecked by the most minor damage, but every ship equipped with a photon sail carries at least

cinerate everything within a few hundred meters of ground zero. Many ships fitted with fusion rockets carry planetary thrusters for atmospheric work, or remain per- manently in space, using shuttlecraft to reach a planet's surface.
  Its fuel is hydrogen, fused in the reaction chamber and expelled as white-hot plasma.

Ion Engine (PL 6)
The ion engine uses power to break down molecules of a

three spares. Unfortunately, it takes hours to stow or deployfuel material to create ions, and then expels them by

a sail.

Crew Check	Deployment
Crit. Failure	d4+1 days
Failure	3d4 hours
Ordinary	2d4 hours
Good	1d4 hours
Amazing	1 hour

  In combat,any weapon hit destroys a deployed photon sail and prevents the sail-ship from making maneuvers

means of a magnetic impeller. It doesn't provide the thrust potential of the fusion torch, but it's much more fuel effi- cient, and its exhaust is not anywhere near as dangerous.
  Ion engines don't function in any kind of atmosphere, so most ships with this kind of power plant also carry a planetary thruster.

Particle Impulse Engine (PL 7)
This is simply an improved version of the PL 6 ion en- gine. The particle impulse drive uses magnetic fields to

until the sail can be re-deployed. The sail-ship will contin-produce a constant stream of high-energy particles and

ue on its last course and retain its former speed until it gets a working sail again.

vector it for thrust.
Unlike the ion engine, the particle impulse engine does-

Since ships powered exclusively by sails can't change n't require a fuel tank. Its reaction is so efficient that the

course easily, assume that all sail-ships are Class I ma- neuverabilit.yIt's a good idea for a sail-ship to carry a

very small amount of matter present in interplanetary or interstellar space can be collected through weak magnetic

secondary propulsion system such as a small ion engine fields and converted into a thrust medium.

or rocket for emergency maneuvering and sailing against the sun.
  
The particle impulse engine is capable of atmospheric entry. It causes some damage to any surface close to its

  Photon sails are completely useless in atmosphere-in exhaust ports, but it's not too much worse than a modern- fact, they're instantly destroyed by atmospheric entry. Mosdt ay jetwash.
sail-ships carry a small back-up propulsion system for

fine maneuvering.

Planetar y Thruster (PL 6)
Several PL 6 engine systems are useless or dangerous in any kind of atmosphere. The planetary thruster is a back- up engine system designed specifically for use when the

Design Tip: Engines
An engine of 10 to 20 percent of your hull is pretty re- a sonable. Anything more than that is going to be neyarl impossible to design around, unless you're building a special fast courier with minimal armament and ame-ni ties for the crew.

Induction Engine (PL 7)
Hands-down the best engine available at this or any p- revi ous Progress Level, the induction engine uses artificial gravity to provide incredible thrust and maneuvera.bility The induction engine requires no fuel and produces n-o ex haust; it's ideal for atmospheric, orbital, or deep-space work.

Inertial Flux Engine (PL 8)
  
Ships with no FTL drive may still enjoy access toTLF travel; it's possible for a large ship with TaLFdrive to tow
or carry a sub-light ship. See "Miscellaneous Installations" for information on docking clamps.

Jump Drive (PL 6)
The jump drive relies on a fairly rare technology type, the technology of matter transmission. It requires an enormous amount of power, so much so that the jump drive itself is a colossal fusion device that derives the power for its jump

By precisely controlling the quantum energy level of every by annihilating massive amounts of hydrogen fuel for a- sin atom on the ship simultaneously, the inertial flux engin-e as gle jump. Thus, the jump drive only requires 5 percent of
sumes the inertial states necessary to produce motion in	the ship's hull points, but it must be built with a fuel tank
any direction. In effect, the pilot chooses from instant-to in that may account for anywhere from another 5 to 50-per stant what vector the ship will next possess, and the inertialcent of the ship's hull. A small amount of shipboard power
flux engine makes it possible.	(1 power point per hull point devoted to the jump drive- ma
This engine requires no fuel and is safe for atmospheric chinery) is also required to control the machinery and direct

work.



Gravitic Redirector (PL 8)

the jump.
  The distance a jump drive can teleport in one jum-p de pends on how much of the ship's mass (i.e., hull points) is annihilated for the jump. For example, a jump ship of 200

A refinement of the induction engine, the gravitic redirector hull points might have fuel tanks with a capacity of 60 hull

changes the ambient gravity in the vicinity of the ship to produce a motive force. It's more powerful and more- effi cient than the induction engine.

Spatial Compressor (PL 9)
One of the most advanced engines available, the spatial compressor surrounds the ship in a field that "folds" or "wrinkles" the structure of space in the direction the pilot wishes to travel. This results in a continuous series o-f mi cro-jumps in which the ship flickers into and out of re,ality teleporting thousands of times every second.
Since the ship has no intrinsic velocity (it's stationary

points of fuel-30 percent of the ship's hull. It could -elimi nate 10 hull points of fuel (5 percent of the hull) for a jump of 1 light-year, or it could eliminate all 60 fuel points for a jump of 6 light-years.
  Since most jump ships use most or all of their available fuel in a jump, they need to jump to a point at which they can refuel their tanks. Obviously, a civilized system will have fueling capability, but if fuel can't be purchased, the jump ship must improvise. Hydrogen can be skimmed from gas giants, separated from water, or mined in the form of ice. Assuming that a suitable source of hydrogen is -avail able, you can assume that a ship requires 1 full day -of fu eling per 10 hull points of fuel collected. See "Mis-cella

while it teleports) the spatial compressor can instantan-eousneous Installation"s.
ly stop or change direction and thrust vector without any	The jump drive can execute a jump anytime it has
maneuvering whatsoever. However, the engine still needs toenough fuel to do so. It takes 1d4 hours to cycle the engine build up cyclic speed to increase the frequency of its micro-and plot the next jump point, so there's usually a sma-ll de

jumps, so it accelerates norma.lly
  The spatial compressor requires a lot of power, but no fuel. It's safe for atmospheric flight.

STEP 5: FTL DRIVE
The term 'FTL' stands for faster-than-light. A ship'TsLF

lay between jumps even if fuel is immediately available.

Wormhole Screen (PL 6)
It's theoretically possible for an object such as a ship to pass through a wormhole-a tunnel in space produced by a spectacular event such as the creation of a black hole-and

drive is the engine system that allows it to break out of the emerge dozens, hundreds, or thousands of light-years from

Einsteinian universe and travel at speeds that make-inter stellar travel easy. With anTFL drive, a ship can make a trip of many years at sub-light speeds into a voyage of months, weeks, days, or perhaps even hours.
  Obviously, not every ship needs to be equipped with an FTL drive. In fact, the expense of mosTtLFsystems means that only the ships thanteedFTL capability will be built
with it, even when technology advances to the point of commonplace interstellar commerce.

its previous location. However, the simple act of passing through a wormhole triggers its collapse, which makes it difficult to use a wormhole as a means of interstellar travel.
  The wormhole screen masks the starship's mass from the wormhole, thus keeping the conduit open long enough for the ship to pass from one end to the other. It also- pro tects the ship from the extreme conditions in the vicinity of the wormhole.
The wormhole screen only allows transit along a na-tural

ly occurring wormhole, which means that a ship can't pick other terminus and cannot jump to a place where no gate its destination; it has to go wherever the wormhole takes it.exists. The length of the transit may be instantaneous, or it
(In some campaigns, networks of pre-existing artificial	could last for several hours; it depends on the GM's-cam
wormholes may make it possible to reach a great number paign.

of stars in this fashion.)
  The screen device requires 5 percent of the ship's hull points, and 2 power points per hull point devoted to the system. A ship of 800 hull points must spend 40 hull points on the screen, and a total of 80 power points t-o en ergize the device. Entering a wormhole is a dicey pro-posi tion at best, so it takes 2d4 hours to perform the course
  
A gate device usually requires some cycle time to amass the incredible energies needed to fling a ship across-inter stellar distances. Again, this is up to the GM, but a period of 2d4 hours as a minimum cycle time is reasonable.

Hyperdrive (PL 7)

calculations and maneuvering necessary to initiate a w- orm This drive system hurls the ship into an alternate dimen-

hole transit once the ship is in the vicinity of the next wormhole it intends to jump through.

Gate Activ ator (PL 7)

sion or reality in which the lightspeed limit is meaning- less. As with the jump drive, it's necessary to calculate a destination before entering hyperspace. This requires 1d4
(x) 10 minutes, or a Navigation skill check (complex skill check of 4 successes at no penalty, 10 minutes per

This device simply keys a gate device of some kind, which check).
functions as a huge teleporter to another gate somewhere	Once the ship is engaged in a hyperspace jump, it
else. It doesn't require very much power compared to othercan't change course. It can drop out of hyperspace at any FTL drives because most of the work is done by the ga- te it time simply by disengaging the hyperdrive, and there self. The gate activator requires 1 percent of the ship's hull may be devices or natural phenomena that bar hyper-

points (1 hull point per 100 hull points of the ship), and 2 power points per hull point allocated to the system.
The ship transiting the gate automatically arrives at the

space travel and interdict any ship passing through the vicinity.
A ship's FTL speed depends on how much of the hull



Table 5-5:  FTL Drives

Min	Base	Cost/	Acceleration Rating at...
Engine	Tech Pow	Size	Cost.	Hull	5%	10% 15%	20%	30% 40%	50%
Progress Level 6: Fusion AgeJump Drive	T15$4 M$1 M-var-----Fuel spent	---$10 K1 LY2 LY3 LY4 LY6 LY8 LY10 LYWormhole Screen M21$1 M$200 K**------Progress Level 7: Gravity AgeGate ActivatorT21$500 K$100 K**	-	-	-	-	-	-HyperdriveX34$5 M$2 M1/day 2/day 3/day	4/day 5/day 6/day	7/dayStardriveG!3$2 M$1 Mvar	-	-	-	-	-	-Progress Level 8: Energy AgeDrivewaveG!2$3 M$1.5 Mvar--	-	-	-	-Spacefold DriveT44$8 M$2 M-pow-	-	-	-	-Psychoportive DriveP	1	10	$6 M	$200 K	-	PEP	-	-	-	-	-
Progress Level 9: Matter Age
Transcendent Drive P	 1	 4	 $12 M	$400 K	 -	PEP/hr-	 -	 -	-	 - Warpdrive	X	2	2	$10 M	 $5 M	1/hr 2/hr 4/hr	8/hr	16/hr 32/hr	64/hr

* The jump drive takes 10 percent of the ship's hull points.TILtsrFating varies with the amount of fuel expended for a jump.
** The wormhole screen takes 5 percent of the ship's hull points; the gate activator takes 1 percent. Performance varies.
! The stardrive and the drivewave require a mass reactor power plant. Performance varies.
Tech:The technology required to build this drive system.
Pow:The amount of power required, per hull point devoted to this system. Minimum Size:The smallest installation possible for this drive.
Base Cost:The cost of the drive.
Cost/Hull:The cost per hull point allocated to this drive; cumulative with the base cost. FTL rating at:The system's TFL travel capability. Refer to the system descriptions for details.

is devoted to the hyperdrive system, with a minimum of 10 percent. Each hull point spent on the hyperdrive re- quires 3 power points to activate the system. For example, a ship of 300 hull points has a hyperdrive of 45 hull points, or 15 percent of the hull; this requires 135 power points to activate, and provides the ship with a speed of 2 light-years per day of hyperdrive travel. There's no limit on the length of a jump other than the simple question of

Class	Base Starfall
Small	5 LY
Light	10 LY
Medium	20 LY
Heavy	30 LY
S-heavy	50 LY

The stardrive requires 5 percent of the ship's hull and 3

how long a ship can remain in hyperspace without re- freshing its stores. (The GM may impose a limit of 1000 light-years per hyperjump at his discretion.)

Psychoportive Drive (PL 7)

power points per hull point of the system; for example, a ship of 80 hull points requires a 4-hull point stardrive and 12 power points to make starfall.
  It's possible to increase the distances shown above by exceeding the power requirements foundToAnBLE5-5. For every 10 power points beyond the minimum allocated to

Psychoportive drive technology uses the power of the mindthe stardrive, the ship can starfall one additional light-.year

to defeat the restrictions of time and space. The- psy choportive drive works a lot like a jump drive, except that instead of burning fuel, it burns psionic energy points (or PEPs) as shown below:

Class	Psi Energy per LY
Small	3 PEP per LY
Light	6 PEP per LY
Medium	10 PEP per LY
Heavy	15 PEP per LY Super-Heavy 25 PEP per LY

  Multiple psionic characters can contributEePsPto in- crease the range of the jump. Each psychoportive jump

For example, a battleship of 1,000 hull points needs 150 power for its stardrive, but if 300 power points are all-ocat ed, it starfalls up to 45 light-years instead of 30 light-years.
  The stardrive requires several days to recharge after a drivespace journey. Typically, it takes d4+1 days to recharge a stardrive for the next starfall.

Driv ewav e (PL 8)
The drivewave generator is simply an improvement of the stardrive. It resembles the earlier engine in most detai-ls, ex cept that the length of a drivespace submergence is only 11 hours, and the recharge time for the drive is only d4+1 hours. Since it cycles much faster, it can cover territory at a

takes one full day. Psionic characters recover their psionic correspondingly faster pace. energy points normally after using them on the initial entry

into Otherspace.
  Calculating the probabilities and energies of the next jump requires one psionic character, the navigator, to- per form a complex skill check againsSt PE-navcognition.The navigator requires 4 successes and may make one skill check every ten minutes to prepare the ship for its next jump.

Spacefold Drive (PL 8)
The spacefold drive "folds space", making it possible for a ship to leap dozens or hundreds of light-years in a single instant. The range of the drive is determined entirely by the amount of energy used to power the system, as long as it meets the minimums specified oTnABLE5-5. For instance,

The psychoportive drive requires 10 percent of the ship' a 200-hull point ship must allocate 20 hull points to the

hull, and uses 1 point of power per hull point devoted to the drive.

Stardrive (PL 7)
The stardrive creates a short-lived, controlled singularity that drops the ship out of normal space and into d-rive space, a parallel dimension tied to the real universe. All drivespace submergences last for 121 hours (about five days). A stardrive must be coupled to a mass reactor; no other power system can energize a stardrive.
  Like the hyperdrive or jump drive, a ship powered by a stardrive must plot its jump carefully; it can't maneuver

spacefold drive, which requires 120 power points. As long as the ship can generate 120 or more power points, it can perform a spacefold of up to one light-year per power point assigned to the drive.
  The spacefold drive can cycle almost instantaneously, but it creates dangerous stresses in the fabric of space; for safety a ship must travel 5d20 (x) 10 AU (astronomical units) from its arrival point in normal space before it's safe to use the drive again.

Transcendent Drive (PL 9)
The transcendent drive system harnesses the power of a

once it enters drivespace, and nothing can interfere with itspsionically gifted person and unlocks unfathomable-ener

progress until it arrives at its destination.
  The base distance achieved by a stardrive in a single jump is based on the ship class:

gies with the key of an intelligent mind. The drive permits travel at FTL speeds in normal space with no careful n-avi gation plots or calculations required. The ship's speed is a number of light-years per hour equal to the psionic energy

score of a single psionic character who is flying the ship at food, water, and waste management systems. This envi-	67
even for a moment immediately expends all of his psionic live. The systems described below include all of these life energy points. He can stay "in the chair" for up to eight	support functions, along with lighting, artificial gravity (in
hours before becoming exhausted. He can begin to recoversome cases), acceleration-control measures, basic com-

psionic energy points normally after he leaves the c.hair
   Example:Jaleel is a fraal mindwalker with 18 psionic energy points. If he takes the helm of a ship fitted with a transcendent drive, the ship will travel at the rate of 18

partmentalization and damage control, and dozens of oth- er critical functions.
  When life support machinery is damaged or de-pow- ered, the compartments it protects aren't rendered instant-

light-years per hour until Jaleel runs out of steam, at whichly lethal. The atmosphere inside remains pressurized.

point another psionic character could take o. ver
Large ships of this type frequently have small teams of

Oxygen lasts for 1d4 hours before running out. The tem- perature drops by 1?0 C every hour, although in the in-

pilot-helmsmen who can rotate the piloting duties. The- tranner portion of a star system, it climbs by the same scendent drive requires 10 percent of the ship's hull points amount instead. Artificial gravity, if any, fails, which may

and a modest amount of pow.er

Warpdrive (PL 9)
By creating a warp fieldin which the normal laws of

make it difficult to maneuver.
  It's entirely feasible for a ship to provide only a portion of the hull with life support. Command systems and crew accommodationsmust be fitted with life support, but all other compartments can be left unpressurized. (However,

physics are suspended, the warpdrive permits FTL travel.at a bare minimum hull points equal to 10 percent of the

The warp field does not interfere with a ship's ability to gather information from its surroundings, and a ship trav- eling with warp drive can change course, stop, or start again at will, as long as power for the drive is available.
Like the hyperdrive, the warp-drive's speed is measured

ship's total must be supplied with life support.)
  The disadvantage of not pressurizing the entire hull is simple; any time that people need to work in the nonsup- ported sections, they must don space suits.
For example, a heavy transport of 1,300 hull points

in the number of light-years it can cross per hour of o-pera could provide life support to as little as 130 hull points, tion. A ship of 100 hull points that devotes 15 hull points towhich is ten percent of its total. The remaining 1,170 hull

its warpdrive has allocated 15 percent of hull to the drive, so it can travel at a speed of 4 light-years per h.our

STEP 6: SUPPORT SYSTEMS
AND CREW QUARTERS
The whole purpose of a starship is to transport humans across the interstellar void. In the early days of space travel, nine out of ten systems in a spaceship are there

points would be in vacuum, but if the ship is a bulk freighter or ore transport, this might not be a problem. Supplying 130 hull points of life support would require seven PL 6 life support units, four PL 7 autosupport units, or two PL 8 symbiotic hull units.

No Life Suppor t
You can include no life support whatsoever in your design. All crewmembers and passengers must remain suited up

for the explicit purpose of protecting the crew from the in-for the entire time they're on the ship. Usually, you would
credibly hostile environment of open space. With the ad- do this only for fighters or launches intended for flights of
vance of technology into the Fusion Age and Gravity Age,no more than a couple of hours. It's not even a good idea

life support systems become smaller, more reliable, and less of a constraint to the shipbuilder.
  If you don't want to figure out your ship's manpower requirements quite yet, use the crew figures oAnBLTE 5-1 as a good estimate for how many accommodations you
should buy. Your crew may be significantly higher or low- er than this if you take the time to figure out your man- ning requirements in detail, but this is a reasonable esti- mate. Figure on spending between 10 and 15 percent of your ship's hull points on crew accommodations, and you'll be in good shape.

Life Suppor t
To support human life in space, a ship must provide a

then, since the ship's endurance is limited to the endurance of the spacesuit.

What Do I Really Need Here?
The only questions in this step that you have to consider right now are life support and crew berthing. Life su- p port systems will take up 0 to 5 percent of your hull points; your ship design must allocate some amount of power and hull points to dedicated life support units.
   If you want to figure out your ship's ideal manning, refer to the required crew sidebar in Chapter 3. You can add up the crew requirements for all the ship's depa-rt ments and determine exactly how much space you

pressurized atmosphere, oxygen, temperature control, plus

should reserve for accommodations..

Life Support (PL 6)
The basic life support system requires 1 hull point per 20

nology at PL 6 or higher, or type X technology at PL 8 or higher. Artificial gravity completely suppresses the effects of deadly accelerations and, of course, provides normal -gravi

hull points of climate-controlled hull. It provides pressu- riza ty throughout the ship.

tion, temperature control, oxygen, and gravity (or acc-elera tion tanks) to the entire ship.

Autosupport Unit (PL 7)
This is simply a superior version of the PL 6 life support machinery. Each unit requires one hull point and provides life support to 40 hull points of the rest of the ship. Again,
  
If artificial gravity is not available, the ship's life support system also includes facilities for high acceleration. Ch- arac ters in a ship with any kind of life support system (or -char acters in a cockpit or command deck seat on ships without life support) are considered to be 'protected' against -accel eration (see "Acceleration Killisn"Chapter 4: The Cold Hard Facts). Some types of engine do not create 'real' acce-lera tion, so a ship with a spatial compression drive is capable

a shipbuilder on a budget can economize by omitting someof thousands of Gs but doesn't require any special p-rotec

portion of the ship from the autosupport machin. ery

Symbiotic Hull (PL 8)

tive measures against acceleration.
  Even if withstanding deadly acceleration is not an issue, it's very convenient (and healthier) for spacefarers to have some kind of gravity. There are two good alternatives-: con

Sophisticated biomechanical interfaces and smart environmen-stant, moderate acceleration, and centrifugal force. tal engineering make it possible to combine the autosupport

machinery and the recycling machinery into a single ship-wide system. The symbiotic hull can be down-sized to provide life

Constant Acceler  ation

support to only part of the ship, such as the autosupport unit. Obviously, this isn't an installed system as much as it is a
philosophy of spaceflight. A constant, moderate acceleration

    Artificial Gr avity and Acceler ation Compensators

serves quite well as artificial gravity. In fact, if a ship can achieve and sustain an acceleration of 1 G (3P0HKper phase, or about 0.000025 megameters per phase, per phase) it's just like standing on the surface of the Earth.

Artificial gravity is automatically included in any life support By maintaining this slow, steady acceleration to the
system, provided the shipbuilder has access to type G- techhalfway point of the voyage, and then "flipping the ship" to


Table 5-6:  Support Systems

SystemTechHullPowerCostNotesProgress Level 6: Fusion AgeLife Support-11$100 KLife support for 20 hull pointsCrew or Troop Bunkroom-30$40 KBerthing for 20 crewmenCabin-10$20 KBerthing for 2 crewmenCrew Quarters-20$20 KBerthing for 6 crewmenSeating Deck-20$10 KShort-term seating for 20 passengersPassenger Quarters-20$50 KStaterooms for 2 passengersCryogenics Unit-21$100 KCapacity of 12 peopleHydroponics Bay-21$75 KFeeds 10 peopleRecycler Unit-11$300 KReduces consumption to 10% normal for 20 peopleDeep Stores-10$5 KIncreases stores by 1,000 daysProgress Level 7: Gravity AgeAutosupport-11$200 KLife support for 40 hull pointsLife Suspension UnitS11$250 KCapacity of 12 peopleProgress Level 8: Energy AgeSymbiotic HullP, M11$250 KLife support for 100 hull pts, recycling for 20 people
Tech:Any advanced technology required for this system.
Hull: The number of hull points used by this system. Some systems require a percentage of the hull.
Power:The amount of power required for a system of this type. Some systems require the listed power for each hull point assigned to the system, while other systems are simply bought and installed as separate units.
Cost:The system cost, or the cost per hull point for a system requiring some percentage of the hull.

begin decelerating at the same rate, a spacecraft can-simu	A crew or troop bunkroom includes an airlock. This may late gravity for most of its trip. There are three problems	or may not be directly connected to the bunkroom, but
with this method: First, the ship is limited to 1G of acc-elerasomewhere in the passageways, lounges, and open areas tion, which means that even relatively short interplanetary that are assumed to come with a bunkroom there's a-n ac voyages will take months. Second, the ship can't maintain cess to the exterior of the hull.

its simulated gravity during violent combat maneuver-s. Fi nally, maintaining a constant acceleration for weeks or
  
Bunkrooms can be used for passengers, but they're not suited for paying fares. No passenger would pay more than

months may be beyond the capabilities of the ship's enginesa third-rate fare for these accommodations. or force the ship to carry a prohibitive amount of fuel.


Centrifugal Force

Cabin (PL 6)
This is simply a condensed version of standard crew -quar

A ship can be designed so that it spins on its axis as it- travters, intended to provide cramped but tolerable living -facili els forward, using centrifugal force to simulate the force of ties for a small vessel. Like the cabin of a modern power gravity. This acceleration is "toward" the skin of the ship; atboat or sailing yacht, it includes the basics-galley, head,
the ship's centerline, there is no appreciable "gravity," but sleeping space, and maybe a table-in a surprisingly small
the farther one travels away from the center of the spinningspace. The cabin includes a hatch for exterior access, but

ship, the more "gravity" the ship seems to have.
  Designing a "spin-ship" requires an additional 5 percent of the hull in wasted space and costs 50,000 per hull point devoted to the spin structure. The ship can't accelerate while spinning to simulate gravity, so combat maneuvers

not an airlock.

Crew Quarters (PL 6)
Two hull points of officer quarters provide high-quality

are impossible. This system is more suitable to short, high-facilities for six crewmembers. As with the cabin or

G accelerations, followed by long periods of coasting with spin-induced gravity for the comfort of the c.rew

Accommodations
All ships that intend to remain in space for more than a

bunkroom, crew quarters include passageways, mess decks, lounges, washrooms, laundry facilities, and so on-everything people need other than a place to sleep. Each unit of crew quarters includes one free airlock.
  Typically, a warship will carry most of its crew com- plement in bunkrooms, reserving separate quarters only

few hours at a time must include living space for the .crew for the officers, technicians, and high-ranking crewmem- In the case of a large ship like a battleship or carrier, thesebers.
accommodations may require hundreds of hull points-, sup

porting thousands of people. In addition, extra accomm- oda tions are often necessary for special designs such as cold- sleep ships, troop carriers, and passenger liners.

Passenger Suite (PL 6)
Each hull point spent on passenger suites adds two first-

If you want to know how many crewmembers your ship class or four second-class passengers to the ship's carrying

design will require, refer tCohapter 3.

No Accommodations
You can choose to provide a ship of with no accomm-oda tions at all. The number of stations included in the ship' cockpit or command deck is the limit of the number of- peo

capacity. Like crew quarters, passenger suites include extra passageways, lounges, galley space, dining rooms, and recreation facilities. Of course, passengers can be carried in normal crew berthing, but the passenger suite provides some degree of luxury for the trip.
Each unit includes a free airlock for access.

ple the ship can safely embark. There are no provisions for sleeping, eating, or even stretching your legs. While this is

Cryo genics Unit (PL 6)

suitable for fighters or similar short-endurance military craft, it's clearly not the best way to go for any larger- ves sels.

Crew or Troop Bunkroom (PL 6)
Three hull points is enough to support 20 crewmembers or

The cryogenic unit is designed to hold a dozen people in suspended animation for years at a time. Multiple cryo- genic units can hold correspondingly more people, and re- quire more power. For example, a cryogenic facility of 100 hull points (50 units) can hold 600 people in sus- pended animation and requires 50 power points.
It takes hours to safely place living creatures into cryo-

marines in spartan living quarters. Each crewmember has genic stasis, or to wake them once they're frozen. On av- a small sleeping cubicle and little else to call her own. Thiserage, it takes four hours to freeze and twelve hours to

is a little abstract, since corridor space, stores, galleys, mess decks, heads, and other common spaces come with the purchase of this system.

thaw a typical human. A creature in cryogenic stasis ages very slowly, about one day for every fifty days of time in cold storage.

70	If power to the cryogenic unit is interrupted for more

only 2, so the total stores consumption drops from 60 days



round until they die or power is restored.

Life Suspension Unit (PL 7)

spend extremely long periods of time in deep space.

Recycler Unit (PL 6)

The life suspension unit is an improvement of the cryogenicDesigned to recapture every gram of biomass produced by unit. Organisms in the life suspension unit aren't just frozent,he ship's crew, the recycler unit drastically extends the life they're actually in true suspended animation. They don't ageof the ship's stores. A ship equipped with a recycler unit
at all and need no provisions for food or respiration. I-n ad consumes stores at ten percent the normal rate. This-is cu

dition, it takes only one round to place a creature into- sus pension or remove it from suspension.
  Interrupting power to the life suspension unit for more than one round wakes all occupants at the end of the- sec ond round without power. People who come out of stasis this way are disoriented (+2 step penalty to all actions) for 2d6 minutes, but otherwise unharmed.

Stores
Just as a hull includes facilities for some number of

mulative with the effects of any hydroponics bays installed. For example, a ship with a crew of sixty and six hydro-pon ics bays only consumes stores at the rate of 6 days of stores per day; if the ship was also equipped with a -recy cler, this would drop to 6 days of stores per ten days.
  Each recycler unit reduces the stores consumption of twenty crewmembers or passengers. It's possible for some crewmembers to be covered by a recycler while others aren't, as long as you don't mind some needless math.

STEP 7: WEAPONS

crewmembers, it also includes stores for those crewmembers
at no cost in hull points, power, or money. Stores are meas- Naturally, most warships will be heavily armed. The ability to ured in days; 20 days of stores could feed one person for 20engage and destroy the enemy is critical to any kind of mili- days, or 10 people for 2 days, or 20 people for a single day.tary spacecraft, and its weaponry is the salient feature of the Whenever you purchase accommodations for your hull, you design. Even nonmilitary craft frequently carry some kind of also purchase a basic allotment of stores-enough to feed thelight armament to discourage piracy or enemy attack.

entire crew for 100 days. In other words, a ship normally carries 100 days of stores per crewmember or passenger.
  For example, a frigate with accommodations for a crew of 60 hands begins with 6,000 days of stores at no extra charge in hull points or money. If the ship's crew capacity is increased to 72 by the addition of 4 more hull points of
  
Weapon systems require hull points and power. Obviously, if the weapon is not currently firing at someone or some- thing, it doesn't need to be powered. Many ships don't have enough power to energize all of their weapon systems, de- fenses, and engine capacity at the same time, and must shunt power from one system to the next as the situation demands.

crew quarters, the ship's stores are increased to 7,200 days Weapons fall into one of four categories: beams, projec-

at no extra cost.

Deep Stores (PL 6)

tiles, launched ordnance, and special weapoMnoss. t ships will be fitted with an armament of no more than two or
three different kinds of weapons; it's much more effective to pour the concentrated fire of a large battery against one

The simplest way to extend the amount of time a ship can target than to attack it piecemeal with one of everything. go without new stores is to simply carry more food and

water. Each hull point of deep stores adds 1,000 days of stores to the ship's capacity. Assuming that one man-day of

Arcs of Fir e

stores is about 1 kg of food and other consumables, this means that a small ship carrying a metric ton of deep stores can keep a single person alive for years.

Hydroponics Bay (PL 6)

When a designer installs a weapon in a hull, he must choose whether the weapon will bear in the forward, starboard, port, or aft firing arc. (Launched ordnance, in- cluding missile racks and launchers, is exempt from this; it can "fire" in any direction regardless of the ship's ori- entation with no special arrangements.) Arcs of fire are

The hydroponics bay is a self-sustaining ecosystem that candiscussed at greater length Cinhapter 1: Basic Comb.at
supply the food, water, and oxygen needs of up to 10- peo	In addition, beam and projectile weapons of small or
ple. Each hydroponics bay reduces the stores consumptionlight firepower may bear on zero arc.
of 10 crewmembers to that of 1 crewmember. For example, All weapons installed in small craft are assumed to in-

a ship with a crew of 60 people normally consumes 60 days of stores each day. If the ship is equipped with two hydroponic bays (or a single hydroponic bay of 4 hull points, if you prefer), 20 of these crewmember count as

clude the full zero arc automatically.
  Standard mounts in light or larger vessels may be des- ignated to bear on the zero-port or zero-starboard arc, plus one other firing arc.

  Turrets in light or larger vessels may be designated to bear on the zero-port or zero-starboard arc, plus two oth- er firing arcs.
  For example, a battleship might install ten plasma guns as a secondary battery in standard mounts. The designer decides that five bear on the zero-port firing arc, and five on the zero-starboard. These weapons can bear on one other firing arc in addition to the zero arc, so the designer decides that the zero-port guns bear on the port arc in ad- dition to the zero arc, and the zero-starboard guns bear on the starboard arc.

Table 5-7: Hull Point Costs for Fixed Mounts and Turrets Standard	Fixed	Turret
1	1	1
2	2	3
3	2	4
4	3	5
5	4	6
6	5	8
7	5	9
8	6	10
9	7	11
10	8	13

	

weapons over a variety of arcs, so a destroyer armed with four fusion lasers might mount two forward, one port, and one starboard.
No more than 25% of the ship's hull points may be

Sponson
The sponson is a bulge or blister in the side of the ship where a weapon can be mounted for an improved field

spent on standard mounts firing to any one arc (except theof fire. It's not as good as a turret; a sponson allows fire
zero arc). For example, in a ship of 40 hull points, no	only into two arcs instead of three. The sponson costs
more than 10 hull points of standard weapon mounts can 25% more than a standard mount of the same type, but be designated as weapons that bear on the forward firing it does not require any additional allocation of hull

arc.
Beam and projectile weapons of 9 hull points or less

points.

automatically bear on the zero arc as well as the assigned arc (or arcs, in the case of turreted weapons).

Banks


Fixed Mounts

Beam weapons of PL 8 or higher can instead be mounted in banks. A bank works much like a turret, in that it ex- tends the weapon's firing arcs from one arc to three and

By eliminating any mechanical training devices, it's pos- costs 25 percent more than a standard mount. However, sible to build a slightly cheaper and smaller version of athe banked weapon takes up no extra hull points; the standard weapon system. A fixed mount fires along one bank consists of a simple emitter plate or band through

hex row at no penalty. A weapon in a fixed moucannt
fire into the normal arc (say, the forward arc instead of

which the energy beam is "steered" by phase interference, much like the electronically scanned phased array radar

just the single line of hexes dead ahead of the ship), butsystem. suffers a +3 step penalty to the attack roll because the
ship must train the weapon by fine maneuvering.
Since the fixed mount requires less hardware than the



Multiple Weapon Mounts

standard mount, a beam, projectile, or torpedo system in aIt's possible to save space and money by housing multiple fixed mount costs 25 percent less than its listed cost, and weapons in the same fixed mount, standard mount, turret,

requires 25 percent less space.

Turrets
By mounting a weapon in a raised structure with clear fields of fire to all sides, it's possible to allocate three

or bank. Because the mount machinery, power supplies, targeting computers, and so on can be installed once in- stead of twice, this is an efficient way to increase a ship's firepowe.r
  Apply the multiple weapon savings after you figure the space and cost requirements for the type of mount (fixed,

arcs of fire to a weapon mount instead of the one arc al-standard, turret, or bank).

lowed by a standard mount. The turret includes signifi- cant machinery, extra armor, climate control, and other
  
Twin Mounts require 1.5 times the space and cost of a single weapon in the same type of mount. Power require-

systems common to the ship, so it costs 25% more mon-ments are unaffected, so it's just like powering up two of

ey and hull points than the standard mount.

the weapon in question.
  Triple Mounts require twice the space and money of a single weapon in the same type of mount. Again, power requirements are unaffected.

  Quad Mountstake 2.5 times the space and money of a single weapon in the same type of mount. The powe- r re quirements are unaffected.
There are two disadvantages to multiple weapon mounts.

IR Laser (PL 6)
Somewhat more powerful than the visible laser, the I-R (in frared) laser focuses light in the infrared spectrum. It -deliv

First, all weapons in a multiple weapon mount must be fired aters more energy to the target than the basic l.aser
the same target, using the same fire mode, if they're fired at all. Modification:At an additional cost of 200,000 credits and

(The captain can choose to leave some barrels of a multiple mount unfired to save power or ammo, but every barrel that

1 hull point, the IR laser can be configured for burst or- aut ofire attack modes. This increases the power consumption

fires must fire at the same target using the same mode of fire.)to 3 power points per round. Second, multiple weapon mounts possess a single- loca

tion for system damage. A ship with four separate fusion lasers can suffer one weapon hit and have three fusion lasers left, but a ship with four fusion lasers in the same mount can have all four knocked out or destroyed by one lucky hit.

Concealed Mounts

X-Ray Laser (PL 6)
This device lases very high-energy x-rays. It is the most powerful of the light lasers.
  Modification:At an additional cost of 300,000 credits and 1 hull point, the X-ray laser can be configured for burst or autofire attack modes. This increases the power cons-ump tion to 4 power points per round.

  Weapons can be built into concealed mounts, providing an unpleasant surprise for a potential enemy. Detecting concealed weaponry requires a specific sensor check at a


Neutron Gun (PL 6)

+3 step penalty (or +1 if the check is made via hi-res	This device directs an intense blast of neutron radiation at
video). Deploying concealed weaponry in the course of a the target, creating severe radiation effects and wreaking

fight forces a new edge check, provided the weapon in question actually hits and causes damage in the fire phase.

havoc on both mechanical and biological targets. The heavy neutron gun is simply a larger version of this device.

Concealed weapons take up 1.5 times the space and cost
1.5 times the amount of money that an unconcealed mount

Fusion Laser (PL 6)

of the exact same type.

Beams

Using a controlled fusion reaction to prime an immensely powerful high-energy burst of radiation, the fusion laser is an extremely powerful version of the x-ray la.ser

Beam weapons direct some form of energy on the target to spectacular effect. They range from weapons as simple as

Graser (PL 6)

a high-powered laser to monstrous devices capable o-f har Like the x-ray laser, the graser is a device that lases very nessing the fundamental forces of the universe against the high-energy electromagnetic waves-in this case, gamma

target.
  Beams represent a good mix of cost, range, accu,racy and damage potential. However, they tend to use a lot of power.
SeeTABLE5-8: BEAM WEAPONSon the next page.

Laser (PL 6)
The simplest beam weapon, the laser is used generally for small craft or point-defense batteries. It directs a fo- cused beam of white-hot light to the target. Thheeavy

rays. It causes severe radiation damage to its target.

Hydr ogen Bore (PL 6)
This mammoth weapon is basically a fusion torch drive de- signed to function as a weapon. It uses magnetic fields to direct a blast of fusing hydrogen at its target. The temperature of the hydrogen bore's discharge approaches ten thousand degrees.
  The hydrogen bore can be fired only as a special weapon; seeChapter 1for details. Note that it is an area- ef fect weapon and may inflict damage on targets in the- gen

laser is simply an oversized laser that pours more energy eral vicinity of the primary target. on the target. It's too big to install on light spacecraft, but

is common on destroyers and larger warships.
  Modification:At an additional cost of 100,000 credits and 1 hull point, the laser (not the heavy laser) can be configured for burst or autofire attack modes. This in- creases the power consumption to 3 power points per round.

Particle Beam (PL 7)
An improved version of the PL 6 neutron gun, this device proj- ects a stream of protons, neutrons, or alpha particles at the tar- get, accelerating each to near light-speed. Not only does it de- liver a scathing blast of hard radiation, but the kinetic energy of particle impact can vaporize its target. The heavy particle beam delivers a higher volume of particles to the target.

Table 5-8:  Beam Weapons	73
Weapon	Tech	Hull	Pow	Cost.	Acc	Range	Fire	Damage	Mode
Progress Level 6: Fusion AgeLaser-12$100 K-21/2/3En/Sd4s/d4w/d4+2wF*IR Laser-22$250 K-21/2/3En/Sd4+1s/d4+1w/d6+1wF*X-ray Laser-22$350 K-21/2/3En/Sd6+1s/d4+2w/d4mF*Heavy Laser-55$2 M-11/3/5En/Ld6+2s/d6+2w/d6mF/GNeutron Gun-77$10 M01/3/5En/L2d4w/2d4+2w/2d4mF/GFusion LaserF1212$20 M+12/4/6En/M2d6w/2d6+2w/2d6mF/GGraserQ1515$40 M+23/6/9En/M3d4s/2d4m/3d4mF/GHeavy Neutron Gun-2222$60 M+33/6/9En/H2d6w/2d6m/2d6+2mF/GHydrogen Bore**F5060$100 M+34/8/12En/SH3d4w/3d4m/3d4cFProgress Level 7: Gravity AgePlasma CannonF33$400 K-21/2/4En/Sd6+2w/d8+2w/d6+1mF*Particle Beam-45$500 K-22/4/6En/Sd6+3s/d4+1m/d4+3mFHeavy Particle Beam-68$4 M-12/4/6En/Ld12+3s/d6+1m/d6+3mF/GHeavy Plasma BeamF88$12 M02/4/8En/Ld8+2w/d12+2w/d8+2mF/GMatter Beam	A1111$20 M02/5/10En/M2d6+1w/2d8+1w/2d8mF/GFusion Beam	F1515$25 M+13/6/12En/Md12+2w/d12+4w/d8+5mF/GQuantum Cannon	Q1818$50 M+24/8/12En/M2d8w/2d6m/2d4cF/GBoson Gun	-2020$80 M+34/8/12En/H3d6w/3d6m/4d6mF/GHeavy Matter Beam A2424$100 M+34/8/16En/H2d6+1m/2d8+1m/2d8cF/GFusion Bore**	F6075$200 M+35/10/15En/SH3d6m/3d4c/3d6cFProgress Level 8: Energy AgeMaser-43$400 K-31/3/5En/Sd6+2w/d4+1m/d6+2mF*Kinetic LanceX21$750 K-32/4/6HI/Sd4+1w/2d4w/d4+3mF*Pulse Maser-64$4 M-12/5/10En/Ld8+4w/d8+2m/d12+2mF/GEM Cannon-88$10 M-13/6/12En/L3d6s/4d6s/4d8sF/GDark Fusion GunD1515$40 M04/8/12En/M2d6w/3d4m/2d4+1cF/GGatling Maser-1836$50 M+13/7/14En/Md8+4w/d8+2m/d12+2mF/G/B/AWeak Force GunM2525$120 M+25/10/15En/H4d4w/4d4m/4d4cF/GStrong Force Gun**M3232$150 M+35/10/20En/H3d6+2m/3d4c/4d6cF/GZero Bore**Q100120$300 M+36/12/18En/SH4d6m/3d6c/3d8cFProgress Level 9: Matter AgeBlacklaserD33$1 M-32/4/6En/Sd8w/d12w/d8mF/B/A/GTachyon GunX1212$40 M04/8/12En/M2d8+2w/2d8m/d8+1cF/GString ProjectorQ, G2430$200 M+26/12/24LI/H4d8w/3d8m/3d8cF/G
* Weapon modifications may make additional fire modes available.
** Area effect weapon; seTeABLE5-11.

Weapon:The name of the weapon.
Tech:The tech track required by this weapon. If more than one tech track code appears here, the builder need only have access to one of the tech tracks mentioned.
Hull: The number of hull points required for the installation of this weapon system. Pow:The power required to employ this weapon in one round of combat.
Cost:The cost, in millions of credits, Concord Dollars, or denomination appropriate to your game. Acc: The weapon's base accuracy modi.fier
Range:The weapons short/medium/long ranges in megameters (units of 1,000 kilometers).
Fire: The weapon's type (low impact, high impact, or energy) and firepower (Small, Light, Medium, Heavy, or Super-Heavy). Damage:The weapon's damage for an Ordinary/Good/Amazing-quality success on the attack roll.
Mode:The weapon system's allowed fire modes. 'F' stands for single-shot; 'G' stands for group (or battery) fire; 'B' stands for burst fire; andA'' stands for autofire.

Plasma Cannon (PL 7)
The plasma cannon uses a powerful charge to convert a mix of chemicals into a white-hot plasma and then ac-celer

cost of 2,000,000 and 2 hull points. Its power consumption increases to 8 points.

Kinetic Lance (PL 8)

ates the mass toward the target with a simple rail gun. The
result is a bolt of incandescent plasma that can explosively The kinetic lance creates a stream of virtual particles -simu

vaporize mundane materials. The heavy plasma cannon simply fires a larger bolt.
Modification:At an additional cost of 200,000 credits and

lating solid matter. At the speeds involved with space-com bat, the impact of the lance is quite destructive.

1 hull point, the plasma cannon can be configured in a rapid- fire quad mount for burst or autofire attack modes. This in-

EM Cannon (PL 8)

creases the power consumption to 5 power points per round.The EM cannon works much like the laser or maser-can
nons, but it concentrates its peak power in the radio band. It

Fusion Beam (PL 7)
Like the hydrogen bore of Progress Level 6, the fusion

is especially effective against electronic equipment, inducing an EMP (electromagnetic pulse) effect similar to that of a nuclear explosion.

beam initiates a fusion reaction and then directs the blast at the target. The PL 7 version is simply smaller and mo-re ef ficient. The colossal fusion bore is simply an exceedingly


Dark Fusion Gun (PL 8)

large example of this same technol.ogy
  The fusion bore can be fired only as a special weapon; seeChapter 1for details. The fusion bore is an area-effect weapon.

Matter Beam (PL 7)
The matter beam works much like a particle accele,rator except that it fires particles of antimatter. The powe- r re quirements to manufacture and contain antimatter within

Based on dark matter reactions, the dark fusion gun- initi ates a reaction in which normal matter fuses into dark-mat ter, releasing an extreme amount of ene.rgy

Weak Force Gun (PL 8)
The weak force gun interferes with the nuclear weak force, causing intense radioactive decay effects at the point -of im pact. The target suffers thermal and radioactive damage as its own atoms irradiate the vicin.ity

the weapon's bore are significant, but the effects are nothing short of spectacular. The heavy matter befairmes a sub- stantially greater number of antimatter particles with a- cor


Strong Force Gun (PL 8)

respondingly greater effect. Note that this weapon cannot beThe nuclear strong force is the force that binds atom- s to

fired through an atmosphere.

Quantum Cannon (PL 7)
The quantum cannon fires a stream of highly charged- sub

gether. The strong force beam emitted by this weapon-caus es the target's atomic nuclei to bind together so tightly that they fuse, releasing an incredible amount of energy. The target, in effect, becomes its own hydrogen bomb.
The strong force gun is an area-effect weapon; see

atomic particles designed to destabilize the atoms of th-e tarTABLE5-11. get and create localized fission reactions. The bosonisgun
simply a larger and more powerful version of this device.



Zero Bore (PL 8)

Maser (PL 8)
The maser channels an enormous amount of power

The zero bore creates a stream of energy that encourages extraordinary amounts of quantum energy fluctuation-the so-called "zero point" energy. Anything in its path is

through a linear antenna array, creating a broad-spectrum wrecked by the spontaneous detonation of space itself. Like blast of electromagnetic energy. It devastates the target withthe hydrogen and fusion bores, the zero bore can be fired heat, light, and intense radiation. The pulse maser is a- largonly as a special weapon.

er version of the same weapon, firing in high-energy -puls es. The gatling maser uses multiple firing arrays to handle even higher energy compressions into shorter pulse widths without burning out the emitters.

The zero bore is an area-effect weapon; sTeAeBLE5-11.

Blacklaser (PL 9)

  Modification:At an additional cost of 300,000 credits and Using the fluorescence of a gaseous form of dark m,atter 1 hull point, the maser cannon can be configured for burst the blacklaser fires a beam of coherent light. To human

or autofire attack modes. This increases the power- con sumption to 6 power points per round. The pulse maser can be configured for burst or autofire attack modes at a

eyes, it resembles the low-ultraviolet glow of a blacklight, but it's actually composed of much more energetic and- dan gerous radiation than ordinary photons.

String Projector (PL 9)

Projectiles

The string projector creates a short-lived cosmic string that Like the naval cannons of old, projectile weapons use a passes through the target. A cosmic string is a very short- motive force of some kind to deliver a distinct payload to

lived chain or rift of extraordinarily mass; think of it as punching a mountain through the target.

Tachyon Gun (PL 9)
The tachyon gun actually fires a blast of high-energy, faster-

the target. The simplest projectile weapons use nothing more than kinetic energy to defeat the target; a 1-kilo block of vanadium steel moving at 20 or 30 percent of light speed delivers energy comparable to a small nuke. More advanced projectile weapons use more efficient propulsion or deliver more dangerous payloads.

than-light particles at the target. Due to its ability to fire in a line Projectile weapons generally cost less and use less- pow
of sight regardless of relative speed between the firing ship	er than beam weapons, but they don't have the same range
and the target, the tachyon gun ignores all penalties for firing or accuracy. The damage is about the same. at extreme high-velocity targets (sCeheapter 4).

Table 5-9:  Projectile Weapons

Weapon	Tech Hull Pow Cost.	Acc	Range	Fire	Damage	Mode
Progress Level 6: Fusion AgePoint Defense Gun-10$200 K-11/2/3HI/Gdd4s/d4w/d4+2wF/B/ARail Cannon-43$500 K01/2/5HI/S2d4s/d6+2w/d4+1mF/GNeedle Driver-66$2 M+11/3/5HI/ Ld6+1w/d6+3w/d4+3mB/AGauss GunS86$5 M+22/4/6HI/ Md6+1w/d6+2m/d4+1cF/GHi-Velocity Rail Gun-2016$50 M+43/6/12HI/ Hd8+2w/d8+2m/d6+2cF/GProgress Level 7: Gravity AgeMass CannonG23$300 K-11/3/5LI/Sd6+2s/d6+1w/d6+3wF/GHeavy Mass CannonG56$2 M02/4/6LI/ L2d6s/2d6w/3d6wF/GAccelerator*-97$10 M+13/5/7En/M2d6s/2d6w/2d6mF/GTach RifleX128$30 M+16/8/10HI/ Md12w/d8m/d12mF/GHeavy Accelerator*-1814$40 M+34/8/10En/H2d6w/2d6m/2d6cF/GAntimatter Gun*A2518$80 M+44/8/12En/H3d6w/3d4m/3d4cF/GSuper Tach RifleX4030$120 M+48/10/14HI/SH2d8m/2d12m/2d8cFProgress Level 8: Energy AgeSliver Gun-42$250 K-21/2/4HI/Sd6+1w/d6+3w/d4+2mF/B/ANeutronium DriverS84$4 M02/4/8HI/ Ld6+3w/d6+1m/d6cF/GBomb Projector*T1015$15 M-14/6/8En/M2d6s/2d6w/2d6mFBomb Salvo*T1218$20 M-15/7/10En/M2d6s/2d6w/2d6mFKinetic Converter*X2010$50 M+24/8/16LI/ Hd12+3w/d12+3m/d12+1cF/GProgress Level 9: Matter AgeTunneling Driver*Q3015$90 M+35/10/20En/M**2d6s/2d6w/2d6mF/GBlack Hole GunG7540$200 M+16/12/24LI/SH3d6m/4d6m/3d8cS

* Area effect weapon; seTeABLE5-11 for more information.
** Ignores target armor and shields or screens.

Weapon:The name of the weapon.
Tech:The tech track required by this weapon.
Hull: The number of hull points required for the installation of this weapon system.
Pow:The power required to employ this weapon in one action round of combat, regardless of how many shots it actually fires. Cost:The cost, in millions of credits, Concord Dollars, or denomination appropriate to your game.
Acc:The weapon's base accuracy modi.fier
Range:The weapons short/medium/long ranges in megameters.
Fire:The weapon's type (low impact, high impact, or energy) and firepower (Small craft, Light, Medium, Heavy, or Super-Heavy). Damage:The weapon's damage for an Ordinary/Good/Amazing-quality success on the attack roll.
Mode:The weapon system's allowed fire modes. 'F' stands for single-shot;'G' stands for group (or battery) fire; 'B' stands for burst fire; andA'' stands for autofire.

Point Defense Gun (PL 6)
The point defense gun is primarily a defensive syste-m in

a low-yield nuke is the warhead of choice).
  The accelerator has a capacity of 16 warhead size points, so it hold sixteen 1-point warheads or eight 2-point

tended for use against incoming missiles. At close ranges, iwt arheads. The weapon's magazine can be increased by

can be employed in an offensive role. The point-defense gun can't be used both defensively and offensively in the same action round.
  The point-defense gun can fire in burst or automatic mode with no additional modification.

Rail Cannon (PL 6)
Using a series of electromagnets to propel projectiles down a magnetic track, the rail cannon can be devastating at close ranges. The projectiles are kinetic-energy weapons with no explosive charge.

Needle Driver (PL 6)
   The needle driveris a larger and heavier version of the rail cannon with an extremely high rate of fire. It fires small metal flechettes at the rate of thousands of rounds per minute. It can fire only in burst or autofire mode.

Gauss Gun (PL 6)
Based on superconducting technology, the gauss gun-is an

four warhead size points by spending an extra hull point and 50,000 on the weapon system.
  Theheavy acceleratorfires any warhead of size four or smaller; the default figures represent a high-yield nuke. Its magazine has a capacity of thirty-two warhead size points, which can be increased by four warhead size points per hull point allocated, at an additional cost of 50,000 per hull point.
  The warheads fired by the accelerator and heavy a-ccel erator are area-effect weapons.

Tach Rifle (PL 7)
The tach rifle falls somewhere in between a projectile weapon and a missile system. Its projectiles are self-pow ered tachyon rockets, but the rounds are not self-guiding- since the tachyon rocket actually breaks the light-speed barrier for an infinitesimal moment, there is no way that it could possibly implement course corrections in mid-flight. The rocket's guidance system is basically a timer that drops it back into real space just in time to strike the target with an extreme high-velocity impact.
The super tach rifleis a more powerful version of the

other electromagnetic accelerator that fires its BB-like slugssame weapon, firing larger tach rockets. at an extremely high veloc.ity


High-Velocity Rail Gun (PL 6)
The largest and most powerful of the electromagnetic rail

Antimatter Gun (PL 7)
This refinement of the PL 6 rail gun technology throws a piece of antimatter at the target. The impact alone -is ex

weapons, the hi-velocity rail gun uses a long track and an tremely destructive, but the "splatter" of antimatter from the immense amount of power to accelerate a relatively small disintegrating warhead creates a cluster-bomb effect for

mass to 0.95c, or 95 percent of the speed of light. Th- e ki netic energy delivered by even a few grams of mass-strik ing at this speed is incredible; the BB-sized projectile can vaporize several hundred cubic meters of solid steel.

Mass Cannon (PL 7)
The mass cannon uses gravitic technology to "charge" a

hundreds of meters around the point of impact. The antimatter gun is an area-effect weapon.

Sliver Gun (PL 8)
An extremely efficient mass driver armed with flechettes (or slivers) of tungsten steel, the sliver gun is the 27th-century version of a heavy machine gun or autocannon. It cycles at

small bit of matter with an incredible amount of gravita- tion a rate of fire of almost 4,000 rounds per minute, and each
al energy and then hurls it at the target. It strikes with the sliver can tear through a meter or more of heavy ar.mor
effect of a wrecking ball, battering the enemy to pieces. The The sliver gun can be fired in burst or autofire modes
heavy mass cannon is a larger and more powerful version with no special modification, but this increases its power

of the same weapon.

Acceler ator (PL 7)

consumption to 6 points of power per round.

Neutronium Driver (PL 8)

Of all the weapons available to spacecraft, this might be theThis weapon is basically a rail gun configured to fire a- pro
closest to the old naval rifles that ruled Earth's oceans for jectile of false neutronium-an object the size of a baseball
centuries. It uses a linear accelerator to throw an unguidedwith a temporary mass of thousands of tons. Since ne-utron

warhead at the enemy. (Refer TtoABLE5-9.) Any warhead
of size 2 or smaller may be used as the accelerator's- pay

ium is electrically neutral, the driver mechanism actually encapsulates the projectile in a sleeve or sabot of ordinary

load (the listed damage and firepower figures assume that matter to fire the slug.

Bomb Projector (PL 8)	Tunneling Driver (PL 9)

Capitalizing on the rare technology of matter transmission, This device employs the principle of quantum tunneling to the bomb projector is simply a device that teleports a-pow launch a projectile that materializes inside the targe-t, by erful bomb to the vicinity of an enemy ship and detonates itp. assing the enemy's surface armor. Any warhead of size 2 Its range is short, but it's unusually accurate for a projectileor smaller (seeTABLE5-10) may be delivered in this fa-sh weapon. Any warhead of size 2 or smaller can be installed;ion; the weapon stats assume that the tunneling driver is

refer toTABLE5-10. The weapon stats assume that the warhead is a low-yield nuke.
The bomb projector has a capacity of sixteen warhead

firing a low-yield nuke.
  The tunneling driver ignores the target's shields, screens, and armor. (Jammers and other devices that interfere with

size points, so it holds sixteen 1-point warheads or eight 2-targeting still affect the attack roll, however.) The driver has

point warheads. The magazine can be increased by four warhead size points per extra hull point (and 50 K) spent on the weapon system.

a capacity of sixteen warhead size points, which can -be in creased four size points by spending an extra hull point and an additional 50,000 on the weapon system.

  Most of the warheads fired by this system are area-effect weapons.


Missiles,  Bombs,  and Mines

Bomb Salvo (PL 8)

Missiles, bombs, and mines are grouped together because they all share two important features: The weapon's effec-

An improvement of the bomb projector, this weapon is- pos tiveness is largely determined by the type of warhead deliv- sible only with matter transmission technology. It teleports aered to the target, and the launch system is extremely sim-
salvo of four size 2 warheads (seTeABLE5-10) to the	ple compared to a beam or projectile weapon. Weapons in
vicinity of the enemy ship. These attack as missile salvo or this category consist of four basic components: the launch

battery fire, with a -1 step bonus to the attack roll of the second warhead, a -2 step bonus to the attack roll of the third, and a -3 step bonus to the attack roll of the fourth.

system, propulsion system, warhead, and guidance system. There are a couple of ways to handle missiles, bombs, and mines in combat. Four missiles fired at the same time

  The bomb salvo has a capacity of sixteen warhead size make up a salvo; forty missiles fired at one time make up points, so it holds sixtee 1-point warheads (four salvoes) ora flight (a very impressive display of firepower). Ten bombs eight 2-point warheads (two salvoes). The magazine can beor mines deployed at the same time comprise a pattern.

increased by four warhead size points per extra hull point (and 50 K) spent on the weapon system.

Kinetic Con verter (PL 8)
  Based on the technology of energy transformation, the kinetic converter instantaneously imparts an immense amount of kinetic energy to a projectile, firing it at tre-men

Generally, it's advantageous to hit the enemy with a number of warheads at the same time instead of firing a bunch of weapons one at a time.

Launch Systems
Launch systemsare designed much like other weapon -sys tems. They take up some number of the ship's hull points,

dous speed. No magnetic acceleration or propellant i-s nec require some power to operate, and cost money to install.

essary, so the converter can fire projectiles of almost any size or composition.

Black Hole Gun (PL 9)
Related to the singularity projector, the black hole gun- cre ates a quantum black hole and fires it at the enemy. A quantum black hole is extremely small-no bigger than a single molecule-but it contains a mass of hundreds o-f mil lions of tons. Each projectile is roughly the mass of a mountain. Tidal effects within a few dozen meters of the black hole are extreme, ripping even the toughest armor to shreds.
The black hole gun can be fired only in 'special' mode;
seeChapter 1for details.
   The warheads delivered by this system are usually area-effect weapons.

The launch system chosen also governs how many- mis siles, bombs, and so on, can be fired in a single round. However, the important weapon characteristics-acc,uracy range, firepower, and damage-are determined by the type of ordnance carried.


Table 5-10:	Missiles,  Bombs,  and Mines (Part 1)
Launch Systems
Weapon	Tech	Hull	Power	Cost	Cap	Reload	ROF	Notes
Progress Level 6: Fusion Age
Tech:The tech track required by this weapon.
Hull: The number of hull points required for the installation of this weapon system. Pow:The power required to employ this weapon in one turn of combat.
Cost:The cost, in millions of credits, Concord Dollars, or denomination appropriate to your game. The launch system cost does not include the cost of any ordnance carried.
Capacity:The capacity of the launch system. Missiles, mines, and bombs of Size 1 require 1 point each; weapons of Size 2 require 2 points each.
Reload:Whether or not this system can be reloaded in open space.
ROF:The number of missiles, bombs, or mines that may be fired in a single round.

Propulsion Systems
Weapon	Tech Size	War	Cost	Acc	End	ACC	Notes Progress Level 6: Fusion Age
Bomb or mine, light-11$5 K-3--Bomb or mine, med-22$10 K-2--Bomb, or mine, hvy-44$20 K-1--Rocket, chem-21$15 K+222*Missile, lightS22$25 K024*Missile, heavyS44$50 K+143*Progress Level 7: Gravity AgeMissile, lightQ, G11$40 K-146Missile, mediumQ, G22$60 K065Missile, heavyQ, G44$100 K+184Progress Level 8: Energy AgeMissile, lightX12$50 K-268Missile, mediumX24$100 K-1106Progress Level 9: Matter AgeMissile, tachyon	Q	4	4	$500 K	0	-	-	Hits target in same phase

* On the PL 6 scale. In PL 7 encounters, divide this figure by ten.

Size:The number of launch system capacity points required by this weapon. For example, two bombs (size 1) or one heavy bomb (size 2) could fit into a bomb rack with a capacity of 2.
Warhead:The size of the warhead that can be mounted on this propulsion system. Acc: The basic accuracy modifier for the weapon, in steps.
End:The number of rounds in which this propulsion system can apply its acceleration before its fuel or power is exhausted. ACC:The acceleration rating of the missile system, in megameters per phase per phase.


Table 5-10:  Missiles,  Bombs,  and Mines (Part 2)
Warheads (Mines, Bombs, and Missiles)
WeaponTechWarCostAccFireDamageProgress Level 6: Fusion AgeAA Burst*-1$5 K-2HI/Sd8w/d6m/2d4mCHE*-2$10 K0En/Ld6+1s/d6+1w/d4+2mKE Submunition*-2$20 K-1HI/Ld6+2s/d6+2w/d6+4wLow-yield Nuke*-2$500 K0En/M2d6s/2d6w/2d6mHi-yield Nuke*-4$1 M+1En/H2d6w/2d6m/2d6cProgress Level 7: Gravity AgePlasma*F1$50 K-1En/Ld6+3w/d8+3w/d6+2mMRB (Mass Reaction)*D2$200 K0En/M2d4+1s/2d4w/d8+1mMatter*A4$2 M+1En/SH3d6w/3d6m/2d6+2cProgress Level 8: Energy AgeStarload*D1$80 K-2En/L2d6w/2d6m/2d4cNova Burst*G2$500 K-1LI/ H2d8w/2d6m/2d4cZero Point*Q4$3 M0En/SH3d8w/3d8m/3d6cProgress Level 9: Matter AgeNull Bomb*

* Area effect weapon.X4$5 M-1En/SH4d6w/4d6m/4d6c
War: The size of the warhead.
Acc: The warhead's accuracy modif.ier
Fire: The attack type (low impact, high impact, or energy) and its firepower (small, light, medium, heavy, or super-heavy.) Damage:The damage inflicted by an Ordinary, Good, or Amazing-quality success on the attack roll.

Guidance Systems (Missiles, Mines)
WeaponTechCostAccNotesProgress Level 6: Fusion AgeActive Radar-$20 K0Can be jammed byCEMEM Homing-$10 K0Accuracy drops to +2 step penalty if target is notEM activeIR Homing-$10 K0Accuracy drops to +2 step penalty if target is nRot IhotCommand-$5 K+1Can be jammed byCEMProgress Level 7: Gravity AgeMass HomingG$10 K-1Progress Level 8: Energy AgeAI ProbabilityC$20 K-2
Acc: The guidance system's accuracy modifier, cumulative with the propulsion system and warhead .accuracy

All launch systems possess a special characteristic calledlaunch system's capacity, medium weapons take up 2
capacity, which indicates how much ordnance the system	points, and heavy weapons take up 3 points. For example,
can carry. Obviously, a missile rack can carry a lot of smalla bomb rack (capacity 4) could carry 4 light bombs, 2 missiles or a few big ones. Generally, each hull point d-evot medium bombs, or 1 heavy bomb.

ed to a launch system provides two to four points of c-apac ity for ordnance. As the designer, you can choose to buy extra capacity for your launch system by allocating some extra hull space and money to the launch system.
  
Most launch systems can be reloaded only in a friend- ly base or port. Even if a ship is carrying extra missiles in its cargo space, it takes a long and complicated EVA procedure to maneuver the ordnance into its firing posi-

  Missiles, bombs, and mines come in three sizes-light, tion. Reloading bomb racks, missile racks, or ordnance medium, and heavy. Light weapons take up 1 point of thecells in open space requires the ship to avoid all speed

80	Table 5-10:  Missiles,  Bombs,  and Mines (Part 3)



Nova Array	G, C	10	2	$23.8 M	-5	*	LI/ H	2d8w/2d6m/2d4c	(40)

* Missile systems have special range considerations; see text.
! The PL 7 ordnance array requires technology types A, D, F, and G.

changes or maneuvers for 1d4 hours.
Bomb bays and missile tubes are an exception to this

multiple missile racks.
Missile Tube (PL 6)T: his is an internal missile storage

rule; they can be reloaded in space, as long as the ship is and launch facility. Its basic capacity is twelve, and it can

carrying extra ordnance in an internal magazine.
  Finally, every launch system possesses a basic rate of fire, which indicates how many weapons it can fire, drop, or dispense in a single round. A missile tube must cycle through the process of bringing the next missile from the

fire one missile per round. While its rate of fire is inferior to the missile rack, the missile tube enjoys one advantage; it can be reloaded in space.
  Ordnance Cell Array (PL 7T):his system is similar to the vertical launch cells of today's naval vessels. Each missile is

magazine to the rail and then firing it off, but a simple rack pre-loaded into a single cell or canister; the array consists

or cell system can torch off a number of missiles at the same time.
  Bomb Rack (PL 6)A: s you might expect, this launch s-ys tem is designed to carry bombs. Its capacity can't b-e ex panded, but a ship could buy and mount multiple bomb racks.
  Bomb Bay (PL 6)T: he bomb bay has a capacity of 40 light, 20 medium, or 10 heavy bombs. Its capacity can be expanded by 4 points (4 light, 2 medium, or 1 heavy

of dozens of these canisters. Bombs, mines, and missiles of various sizes and warheads can be carried as the-ship builder sees fit, offering a great deal of tactical flexi.bility

Propulsion Systems
The fuselage, engine, casing, and general design of the weapon is included in this category. Propulsion systems range from virtually none (bombs or mines) to sophisticated

bomb) for each additional hull point assigned to the systemdevices such as the tachyon missile.

beyond the 10 hull points normally required. Minelayer (PL 6):This system consists of two or more
  
Thesizeof the propulsion system indicates how many points of launch system capacity it takes up. For example, a

mine rails, low-powered magnetic accelerators designed tomedium bomb takes 2 points of capacity, so a bomb rack

deploy a pattern of mines into one hex adjacent to the launching ship in a single phase. Unlike other launched

(capacity 4) could carry two medium bombs.
The warheadrating of the propulsion system describes

weapons, at least ten mines (a single mine pattern) must bethe maximum size of the warhead that can be fitted to that

deployed to be effective.
  Since the minelayer also includes machinery for de-ploy ing the mines, it has half the capacity of other launch- sys tems of a similar size.
Missile Rack (PL 6)T: his is a system that can hold eight

propulsion system. Very large and powerful warhead-s re quire heavy propulsion systems, while small warhead-s re quire light propulsion systems.
  The weapon's propulsion system also provides a basic accuracyrating. This reflects the fact that small missiles are

light missiles, four medium missiles, or two heavy missiles.generally more nimble than large missiles, and thus more Its capacity can't be increased, but it's easy enough to buy likely to hit a target that's trying not to be hit.

  Enduranceis the number of rounds in which the missile gy) and firepower (small craft to super-heavy) of the warhead. can accelerate. After the missile's endurance runs out, it	It's the best indication of just how destructive the warhead is; a
must maintain its last course and speed and can no longer light bomb can blow up a vehicle or a building, while a super- maneuver. (Bombs and mines don't accelerate, so they donh'teavy warhead may destroy fortress ships or entire cities.

have an endurance rating of any kind.)
  Accelerationmeasures the missile's ability to change its course and speed each phase. If you prefer to play with simpler missile rules, refer tCohapter 1for details on light, medium, or heavy missile speeds.
  Bombs (PL 6):A bomb is basically nothing more than a warhead delivered through the deft maneuvering of some
  
The weapon's damage rating indicates the damage -inflict ed by an Ordinary, Good, or Amazing-quality success on the attack roll.
  AA Burst (PL 6):This small warhead is intended for use against small craft, enemy missiles, and vehicles. It ca- n se riously damage a fighter or trader, but it's unlikely to cause any significant damage to a destroyer or cruiser. The-war

ship. Light, medium, and heavy versions exist to acco-mmo head consists of a high explosive burst charge and a d-irect

date warheads of various sizes.
Mines (PL 6):Again, a mine doesn't require much in the

ed spray of shrapnel.
The AA burst is an area-effect weapon. It can damage

way of propulsion. Light, medium, and heavy versions are targets dozens of meters from its burst point. The quality of

available.
Chemical Rocket (PL 6I)n: the absence of any better

the attack roll indicates how close to the target the missile got before it detonated.

technology, a simple chemical rocket works as a propulsion CHE (PL 6):The conventional high-explosive warhead
system. It has no chance of catching any ship equipped	can wreck many small craft, but it's useful only in salvos or
with a decent engine, but it's dangerous to low-speed shipsflights against light and medium warships. Heavy vessels

such as sailships.
  Missile (PL 6, 7, 8)A: s different engines become av-ail able, missile capacity and speed increase. It's important to make a note of exactly what Progress Level missile a ship carries, since the PL 7 and 8 missiles are hundreds of times faster than the PL 6 missile engines.
The PL 6 missiles are built around ion engines; PL 7

such as battleships can ignore the weapon despite its- pay load of hundreds of kilos of advanced chemical explosives.
The CHE warhead is an area-effect weapon.
  KE Submunition (PL 6)T:his warhead consists of a b-un dle of dozens or hundreds of tungsten steel darts or rods, each mounted on small rocket motors. When the weapon
approaches its target, the warhead splits into a deadly sleet

missiles are built around particle impulse drives or gravity of high-velocity metal arrows. The impact energy alone can

induction engines; and the PL 8 missiles are built around inertial flux drives or gravitic redirectors.
  Tachyon missile (PL 8)T:his is a special missile prop-ul sion system that uses anTFL drive to deliver the warhead

vaporize meters of heavy arm.or
  Any other targets within 200 meters of the primary- tar get are attacked at the same time. Each target gets its own attack and damage rolls.

to the target instantaneously. A ship firing a tachyon missile Low-Yield Nuke (PL 6)M: arginally more acceptable than

ignores the penalties for firing at targets moving a-t ex tremely high velocity. In fact, the tachyon missile can be fired even while a ship is travelingTLFagainst another TFL target within range. (See T"FL Combat" inChapter 1.)

Warheads
The warhead is the business end of the bomb, mine, or missile. Warheads range from simple kinetic energy p-ene trators-steel spears-to explosive devices harnessing the fundamental forces of the universe.
Warheads vary in size, and so require different pro- pul

the H-bomb, the low-yield nuke is a fission weapo-n de signed to "fizzle" in an explosion of only 2 or 3 kiloton-s, in stead of a 30 or 40 kiloton city-killer. This is still an e-nor mous amount of firepower, capable of devastating a city center or military base.
  The low-yield nuke is an area-effect weapon. Don't forget that damage upgrades against targets of inferior to- ugh ness-the nuke inflicts 2d6m against things like people and cars within its 800-meter blast radius.
  While the low-yield nuke will devastate an area more than a kilometer across, in a space battle this almo-st al ways means that only a single enemy ship is affected. On

sion systems and launch arrangements. This is reflected bythe megameter scale of combat, a single hex is 1,000- kilo
the warhead's siz.eFor example, a mass reaction warhead  meters across.
is a size 2 warhead, which means that it's too big for a light High-Yield Nuke (PL 6):hisT	a 1-megaton monster, a

bomb or a light missile. A medium or heavy bomb or-mis sile would be required to carry a mass reaction warhead. Accuracyrepresents just how good of a hit is necessary

city-busting fusion bomb hundreds of times more powerful than the low-yield weapon. In open space, it's unlikely that more than one enemy ship could be affected by a single

for the warhead to take effect. Very large weapons such asblast. However, a high-yield nuke is a city-k.iller

fusion bombs and matter bombs don't need to detonate on top of their target to wreck it, so they have an accuracy bonus. This is cumulative with the accuracy modifiers for the propulsion system and the guidance system.
Firepowerrates the type (low impact, high impact, or ener-
  
Plasma (PL 7):The plasma warhead is an improvement on the advanced explosives of the previous Progress Level. It creates a blast of white-hot plasma that can blast a small ship like a fighter out of the sky with one shot.
MRB (PL 7):This warhead uses a dark matter reaction to

82	Table 5-11:  Area Effect Weapons
Range for Damage of QualityWeaponTypeAmaGoodOrdinaryNotesProgress Level 6: Fusion AgeHydrogen Borebeam100m200m300mTAAA Burstwarhead10m20m40mTACHEwarhead20m40m60mTAKE	warhead	all targets within 200m attacked	TALow-yield Nukewarhead200m400m800mMDHigh-yield Nukewarhead5 km10 km20 kmSAProgress Level 7: Gravity AgeFusion Borebeam200m400m600mTAStrong Force Gunbeam150m300m600mTAAntimatter Gunproj.100m200m300mMDPlasmawarhead60m120m180mTAMatter Reactionwarhead500m1 km2 kmSAMatter Bombwarhead10 km20 km40 kmSAProgress Level 8: Energy AgeZero Borebeam300m600m1 kmMDKinetic Converterproj.200m400m800mMDStarloadwarhead80m160m240mTANova Burstwarhead1 km2 km4 kmSAZero Pointwarhead20 km40 km80 kmSAProgress Level 9: Matter AgeNull torpedotorpedo100m200m300mTANull bombwarhead30 km60 km100 kmSAType:The weapon's category (beam weapon, projectile weapon, or warhead for a missile, bomb, or mine).
Range for Damage of QualitTyh: e range at which the weapon inflicts its Amazing, Good, and Ordinary damage figures. For example, the low-yield nuke inflicts its Amazing damage of 2d6m within 200 meters of the detonation point, its Good damage of 2d6w within 400 meters, and its Ordinary damage of 2d6s within 800 meters.
Notes:Weapons marked TA are considered tactical arms and may be freely employed. Weapons marked MD are considered weapons of mass destruction and may be specially limited or controlled. Weapons marked SA are strategic arms and generally can't be used with the direct approval of a national command a.uthority



create a powerful wave of energy. It's more concentrated than a nuclear blast, but less likely to cause unwante-d col lateral damage. SeeTABLE5-11 for details on area-effect weapons.

cruiser, and may seriously damage larger warships. The nova burst is an area-effect weapon.
  Zero Point (PL 8)T: his bomb creates a spontaneous quantum fluctuation of energy akin to the Big Bang, albeit

  Matter (PL 7):The matter warhead is more properly called on a smaller scale. It can devastate thousands of square the antimatter warhead; it contains a kilo or two of antimatterkilometers in an instant. The warhead may miss its target in a magnetic bottle, and detonates simply by shutting down by dozens of kilometers and still inflict lethal damage -to ro

the containment vessel. It's equivalent to a nuke.
  Starload (PL 8)T: he most powerful of the purely tactical warheads, the starload is fueled by a dark-matter reaction akin to that of the matter reaction burst of PL 7. How,ever it's miniaturized for smaller applications. Like most-war heads, it can cause damage in a wide area of effect. Note that the bantam starload rocket described inPthlaeyer's Handbookis a much smaller version of this weapon.
  Nova Burst (PL 8)T: his warhead creates an incredible gravitational force to compress normal matter into a-n in

bust targets such as orbital fortresses or heavily armored battleships.
  Null Bomb (PL 9):This horrifying weapon simply gen-er ates a field in which all atomic bonds cease to exist. All nearby matter is reduced to subatomic dust.

Guidance Systems
The last component of a missile or mine is its guidance sys- tem. How does it recognize its target, and what controls its

credibly dense mass, which then explodes in a colossa- l detdetonation? The only game effect a guidance system provides
onation. A single nova burst can cripple a destroyer or	is a final modifier to the weapon's accura. Mcyost missiles

tend to be very accurate, but this is balanced by the fact thatspectrum, the missile's accuracy drops to a +2 step pe.nalty	83
seeker that locks onto the target and guides the weaposn. It'es, missile launches, and other heat-producing device-s cre a 'fire and forget' system, since the weapon needs no-guid ate a large infrared signature for the warhead to lock onto.

ance from the launch platform once its radar seeker- acti vates. This guidance system is most appropriate for- mis
  
If the target is "cold and dark" and doesn't emit any heat, the guidance system's accuracy drops to a +2 step pe.nalty

siles, since mines with actively emitting warheads would be Command (PL 6)T: he weapon is directed through an- ac

very easy to spot and avoid.
EM Homing (PL 6)T:he weapon is fitted with a sensitive

tive command signal from its launch platform. In other words, someone on the launching ship is using a joystick to

antenna array that detects the target's electromagnetic emis- fly the missile at the target (actually, he's probably using sions and homes in on them. EM emissions normally includesome kind of sophisticated hands-off computer software, but sensors, fire control, radio communications, and "engine noisey"ou get the idea). Command guidance is cheap and re-ason
caused by powerful magnetic fields in fusion or antimatter	ably accurate, but it's not a 'fire and forget' system like the
plants. EM homing is especially effective against attempts to other forms of guidance available at PL 6.
jam the missile through electronic countermeasures; the seek- Mass Homing (PL 7)T: he mass detector, a Gravity Age

er head defaults to a "home on jam" mode that guides the warhead to the source of the electronic emissions.

technology, makes this seeker head possible. The weapon locks onto the gravitational signature of the target and- pur

If the target is not actively emitting in the electromagneticsues it with great accuracy. Unlike the EM or IR homing
Sample Bomb and Missile Systems
If you don't want to go to the effort of custom-building every missile your warship carries, you might want to check ov this list for some pre-packaged weapon systems to install. Obvioyu, salny of these systems could be customized easily by changing the ordnance carried.
SMP Bomb Rack (PL 6)
The SMP bomb rack weapon system consists of a bomb rack with two KE submunition warheads in medium bomb casin It takes up only a single hull point, so it's suitable for fighters, strike fighters, and other small craft that need to deliver reasonable punch to a ground target or a large ship.
Fusion Bomb Rack (PL 6)
Take the two KE bombs off the rack and replace it with a high-yield nuke, and you've got a weapon of mass destruction. T fusion bomb can destroy a hardened enemy base, wipe out a city, or wreck a battleship in a single blow. Of course, the bo rack mounts only one fusion bomb, but how many fusion bombs do you really need?
CHE Missile Rack (PL 6)
This is a launch rack fitted with four light missiles, each equipped with aHECwarhead and an active radar guidance s-ys tem. It's most useful against small craft, light warships, or relatively soft ground targets. This weapon system would be good mount for a strike fighter against small craft or light ships, or for an extra antiship punch on board a larger vesse Missile Mount (PL 6)
Consisting of a launch tube with 7 hull points devoted to an expanded missile magazine, this system features 20 ligh- t m siles-10 with KE submunition warheads for use against enemy vessels, and 10 with AA burst warheads for use agai fighters and enemy missiles. All missiles are guided by active radar, so they're fire-and-forget. It's a good general-purpo mount for a PL 6 destroyer or corvette, providing both offense and defense.
Plasma Missile Rack (PL 7)
This system consists of a missile rack with eight light missiles, each armed with a mass-homing plasma warhead. It's a good weapon for fighters or strike fighters to use against other small craft, and it offers a reasonable antiship punch against light warships such as destroyers.
Matter Missile Rack (PL 7)
Substitute two heavy missiles with matter warheads for the light missiles of the previous system, and you've got a capi ship killer or city-buster. This rack mounts two matter missiles with mass-homing warheads. The super-heavy firepow and extreme damage of these weapons means that a single fighter or strike craft can blast a battleship out of existenc with a lucky shot.
Ordnance Array (PL 7)
This 20-hull point ordnance cell system includes 20 plasma missiles, 10 matter missiles, and 10 mass reaction burst min (enough for one mine pattern). This would constitute the main battery of a light cruiser or destroyer. The plasma missil can be used against small craft or incoming missiles, the matter missiles can threaten a capital ship, and the mines a suitable for a variety of missions.
   Note that the ordnance array is very flexible; a ship designer could mix and match the ordnance carried to any numb of specific missions.
Nova Array (PL 8)
This is an ordnance cell array packed with forty AI-guided nova burst warheads on light missiles. This is sufficient for t salvoes or one flight of missiles. The nova array could be the main armament of a missile corvette or cruiser. It can- ov whelm medium or heavy warships with a massive volley of powerful missiles.

systems, there aren't many countermeasures that can fool the mass homing warhead.
  AI Probability (PL 8)T: his guidance system consists of a passive/active EM seeker head coupled to a powerful-com puter processor. Not only can it home in through th-e tar get's electromagnetic signature, but it can also for-m ex
  
The main drawback to this weapon is the fact that each use wrecks the equipment; the RF spike can be fired once, and then the installation must be replaced.
  Spare components for the RF spike cost 100,000 and take up one hull point of space per three shots. It takes d4 hours to replace the RF spike if the parts are on board.

tremely accurate predictions of the target's future movement and plot sophisticated intercept courses.


Thermal Inducer (PL 6)

Torpedoes and Special Weapons

This is the classic heat ray, an energy field in which m-olec ular motion is drastically accelerated, thus raising th-e tar get's temperature. It affects all targets in a single hex within range. The inducer begins with an accuracy of +3 steps in

The last category of weapons available to the shipbuilder isthe first round that it is fired, but this improves by one step torpedoes and various special weapons. Torpedoes ge-neralin each consecutive round that the weapon is trained on the
ly carry a punch disproportionate to their size, offering a	same target ship. For example, if an inducer is fired at the
small ship the ability to damage a much larger one. Specialsame ship three rounds in a row, its accuracy is +3 steps

weapons are a catch-all for a number of strange devices that just don't fit anywhere else.

Cable Gun (PL 6)
The cable gun fires a magnetic grapple to a distance of about 10 kilometers; its winches can then drag the -grap

in the first round, +2 steps in the second, +1 steps in the third, and so on. The weapon's best possible accuracy is -3 steps.

Thermal Nullifier (PL 6)
The opposite of the thermal inducer is the thermal nu.llifier

pling ship (or its target) into contact, making a boardin-g ac This weapon creates a field that suppresses molecula-r mo
tion possible. The firing ship must be in the same hex as  tion, lowering the target's temperature. In extreme cases, all
the target, and it must match the target's course and speedmolecular activity is arrested, reducing the target t-o ab

(seeChapter 1).
The winch attached to the cable gun can "drag" 50 hull

solute zero-a very damaging state for most spaceships. Like the thermal inducer, this is a beam or field that affects

points of mass. This means that a ship larger than 50 hull all targets in a single hex, plus any targets that lie directly

points that cables another ship larger than 50 hull points simply doesn't have the winch capacity to drag its target closer or itself to its target. However, multiple cable guns

between the firing vessel and the target.
  The inducer begins with an accuracy of +3 steps in the first round that it is fired, but this improves by one step in

add their capacities together, so a ship with four cable gunseach consecutive round that the weapon is trained on the can pull 200 hull points-enough to drag itself to its target same target ship, to a maximum accuracy of -3 steps.
or its target to itself if either is 200 hull points or less in

size.
The reel speed is 100 meters of cable per phase, so a

Tractor Beam (PL 7)

target one kilometer away would take ten phases to reel in.An application of advanced gravity tech, the tractor beam
If the grappled target creates an acceleration of 0.01	works a lot like the cable gun of PL 6, except that it's much
Mpp that isn't instantly matched by the grappling ship, thebette.r It can be used at range, and against targets whose cable snaps. The cable gun mount and winch includes onecourse and speed differ wildly from the firing ship. Each tractor spare cable per cable gun, which can be installed in aboutbeam mount is capable of capturing up to 50 hull points. Multi-

an hour of work.

RF Spike (PL 6)
Also known as the HERF gun (High Energy Radio Frequ-en cy), this weapon consists of a powerful capacitor and a simple linear antenna. It generates a one-shot electro-mag

ple tractor beams can "combine" to capture larger vessels.
  If the tractor beam can affect the target, the firing ship can apply an acceleration of 0.25 Mpp per phase to the target vessel. If the firing ship has enough tractor beams to affect the target multiple times, this acceleration capac-ity in creases as shown below:

netic pulse that burns out the capacitor and its antenna, but it can cause seriousMEP damage to the target. TheFR
spike has super-heavy firepower, but it never upgrades its damage against any target, regardless of toughness. I-n oth er words, it has the same effect on a dreadnought that it does on a fighter (although the dreadnought probably has a lot more boxes on its damage track).

Tractor	Target Overage	 Acceleration 1x		0.25 Mpp
2x	0.5 Mpp
3x	1 Mpp
4x	2 Mpp
5x	3 Mpp

Table 5-12:  Torpedoes and Special Weapons	85
WeaponTechHullPowCost.AccRangeFireDamageModeProgress Level 6: Fusion AgeCable GunS21$150 K+10--SpecialFRF Spike-36$500 K-21/2/3En/SH3d4s/3d6s/2d4w****FThermal InducerX812$4 M+3@2/4/6En/Md6w/d6+1w/d6mFThermal NullifierX1520$35 M+3@2/4/6En/Md6+3w/d6+4w/d6+2mFProgress Level 7: Gravity AgeTractor BeamG25$500 K-12/4/8--SpecialFMass ConverterM46$1 M-42/4/6En/Sd6+3s/d6+3w/d6+2mFMatter TorpedoD57$600 K02/4/8En/M2d6s/2d6w/d6+3mFPlasma TorpedoF1015$10 M+13/6/9En/H3d6s/3d6w/d8+3mFProgress Level 8: Energy AgeEM TorpedoQ35$450 K-22/5/10En/Md6+3s/2d8s/d4+2wFNeural InhibitorP1220$40 M01/2/3**1d12s/1d12w/1d20w**FFission ActivatorM2575$80 M04/8/12En/H2d4m/2d4+2m/3d4+2cFProgress Level 9: Matter AgeBoarding TransporterT69$10 M--4/6/8--SpecialFNull TorpedoX1825$50 M+23/6/15En/SH2d8w/2d8m/2d8cFCode ArrangerM2550$100 M+14/8/12***/Hd8m/d8+4m/d8cF** The neural inhibitor only affects crewmen; see the weapon description.
*** The code arranger ignores arm. or
**** The RF spike never upgrades damage against targets of inferior toughness.
@ Accuracy improves by 1 step for each consecutive round the weapon is fired at the same target, to a maximum of a -4 step accuracy bonus.
Weapon:The name of the weapon.
Tech:The tech track required by this weapon.
Hull: The number of hull points required for the installation of this weapon system. Pow:The power required to employ this weapon in one round of combat.
Cost:The cost, in millions of credits, Concord Dollars, or denomination appropriate to your game. Acc: The weapon's base accuracy modi.fier
Range:The weapons short/medium/long ranges in megameters (units of 1,000 kilometers).
Fire: The weapon's type (low impact, high impact, or energy) and firepower (Small craft, Light, Medium, Heavy, or Super-Heavy).
Damage:The weapon's damage for an Ordinary/Good/Amazing-quality success on the attack roll. Mode:The weapon system's allowed fire modes. 'F' stands for single-shot.


6x	4 Mpp
7x	5 Mpp
8x	6 Mpp
9x	7 Mpp
10x	8 Mpp
  
If the target is too big to affect but the tractor-armed ship isn't, the tractor beam will pull the firing ship towards its target, not the other way around. If both ships can be a- ffect ed, the smaller ship moves toward the larger. Note that the acceleration applied by the tractor beam always pulls the target in; a tractor-armed ship can't shove another ship into

For example, a destroyer mounts three tractor beams, soa convenient asteroid or planet.

it can affect a target of up to 150 hull points. It encounters a scoutship of 30 hull points and tries to capture it. The
  
Once the tractor beam scores a successful hit, it remains "locked on" and exerts its acceleration each phase until the

tractor capacity is 5 times that needed to hold the scout, sofiring ship releases the beam or the target escapes. A target
the destroyer can apply an acceleration of 3 Mpp to the	ship can shake off a tractor beam with a successful crew
ship each phase. Depending on the power of the scou-t's encheck (or pilot skill roll against Vehicle Operatiospnas-ce- gines, this may be enough to slow it down, halt it altog,ethercraft) provided the check equals or exceeds the success

and begin to pull it in. Ships without acceleration com- pen sation can be instantly destroyed by the extreme acc-elera

grade of the tractor beam's attack roll. In other words, it takes a Good success in a crew check to shake off a tractor

tion imparted if the operator is not careful; see "Accelerationbeam that scored a Good hit when it initially captured the
Kills" in Chapter 4.	target vessel.

Mass Con verter (PL 7)

use. It transports up to ten characters at one time onto an enemy vessel, provided the target does not have a fun-ction

The mass converter manipulates matter at a distance,-causal ablative screen to interfere with the transporter's carrier ing the target's atoms to strip each other of electrons. The signal. In most cases, the boarding transporter is used-to in
corrosive effect can turn steel into a fine gray powder in	sert teams of heavily armed marines or bomb-equipped
seconds. The mass converter ignores all defensive screenssaboteurs to take the fight to the enemy dire. ctly or shields except for the ablative screen.


Matter Torpedo (PL 7)

Code Arranger (PL 9)
Perhaps the ultimate weapon, the code arranger "re-codes"

This energy torpedo launches a ball of dark matter plasma the basic characteristics of the target's atomic structure into at the target, which explodes with tremendous effect upon something not at all useful, such as antimatter, hydrogen, or

impact. Its outstanding firepower makes up for a short range and high power demand. The plasma torpiesdao larger and more dangerous version of the same weapon.

EM Torpedo (PL 8)
This weapon is built around a specialized electromagnetic pulse warhead powered by a fusion reaction. It's kind of like guided ball lightning fueled by a small H-bomb. It- gen

random energy. Armor is completely useless against the code arranger's insidious attack, since it is normal matter too and can thus be affected in the exact same manner as the rest of the target vessel.

Null Torpedo (PL 9)
This weapon consists of an energy field that neutralizes all electromagnetic energy at the point of impact. Without- elec

erates an extreme amount of EM noise, and causes i-oniza tromagnetic energy, matter cannot exist-chemical bonds of

tion damage and electronics degradation in the target.

Neural Inhibitor (PL 8)

all kinds instantaneously fail, leaving nothing but an e-lectri cally neutral cloud of subatomic dust. In effect, the nu-ll tor pedo disintegrates whatever it hits.

This weapon creates a pattern of neural interference that is essentially incompatible with all multicellular life. It ignores

STEP 8: DEFENSES

all defenses and armor, and causes no damage to the ship Large warships are extremely valuable investments, both in
at all. Instead, the damage inflicted by the neural inhibitor terms of the amount of money required to build one and in
only causes crew losses. On an Ordinary success, the- neu the training and skill of the crew. Preventing lethal damage

ral inhibitor reduces the target's crew check rating by 1 point; on a Good success, 2 points; and on an Amazing success, 4 points. A given ship can only be affected by a neural inhibitor once per battle (the crewmembers sus-cepti

and balancing firepower, mobility, and protection hav-e al ways been major concerns of the naval architect. No one wants to build the nexVtasa or Hood.
The first line of defense for any ship is its sheer size and

ble to the particular frequency of the interference die o-r col basic compartmentation. Because large ships have superior lapse, and additional exposures don't harm those who- sur toughness ratings, fire from smaller weapons and ships

vived the first shot).
   The damage figures listed for this weapon are directly applied to any important crewmember (i.e., player-con trolled hero) on board the target ship.

Fission Activ ator (PL 8)

downgrades in its effectiveness; sCeheapter 1. It's hard for
a space marine with an assault rifle to cause serious-dam age to a colony transport, even if the colony transport is completely unarmed and unarmored.
  The warship's second line of defense is its armor-, dis cussed earlier in this chapter. Armor serves to block o- r re duce damage that could otherwise cause the ship grievous

This field generator creates a region in which otherwise sta-harm. However, armor isn't the only to protect a ship- ble atoms-for instance, the alloys of a ship's hull-begin to many other advanced defensive systems exist. undergo nuclear fission. Depending on the type of fissionable SeeTABLE5-13:DEFENSIVESYSTEMSon the next page. involved, the reaction may release a great amount of energy,

or it might just "fizzle," creating local weaknesses and rup- tures in the target's structure. The fission activator affects all

Chaff (PL 6)

targets in a single hex, but it has no effect on any targets in-Consisting of a number of small rocket launchers positioned

tervening between the target area and the firing ship.

Boarding Transporter (PL 9)
Based on the very rare matter transmission techno,logy

around the ship, the chaff system deploys a cloud o-f mil lions of tiny metal strips or particles to interfere with active sensors and missile seekers. Deploying chaff adds a +1 step penalty to enemy missile attack rolls and sensor checks for three full action rounds. Enemy vessels equipped

this weapon is a teleportation device that is safe for humanwith mass detectors may ignore the effect of chaff.

Table 5-13:	Defensive Systems	87
System	Tech	Hull	Power Cost	Coverage	Notes
Progress Level 6: Fusion AgeChaff-10$50 K100 hull pts+1 step to missiles, sensorsDamage Control-5%1/hull$100 K/hull---2 step bonus to Damage ChecksDecoy DroneC11$600 K100 hull pts3 dronesJammer-11$100 K100 hull pts+2 steps to missiles, sensorsMagnetic ScreenS42$400 K20 hull pts+2 steps to missiles, projectilesStealth HullS21$500 K50 hull pts+2 steps to enemy Sensor ChecksProgress Level 7: Gravity AgeDefense NetworkC, F22$500 K100 hull ptsSpecialDeflection InducerG12$500 K20 hull pts+2 step penalty to enemy attacksParticle ScreenQ23$750 K20 hull ptsAdds d4 (LI), d4 (HI), d6 (En) armorStealth ShieldM22$2 M100 hull pts+3 steps to missiles, sensorsStardrive ScramblerG12$200 K100 hull pts+4 step penalty to drive detectorsRepair BotsC5%1/hull$500 K/hull---3 step bonus to Damage ChecksProgress Level 8: Energy Age
Ablative ShieldGenerator--12$500 K20 hull ptscapacitor or compiler requiredCapacitor--1-$100 K--10 shield pointsEnergy CompilerX1-$500 K--20 shield pointsCloaking UnitM15$1 M100 hull points+4 steps to missiles, sensorsDisplacerT23$1 M20 hull points +3 step penalty to enemy attacksProgress Level 9: Matter AgeNanite Repair Array	C	5%	2/hull	$1 M/hull	5 step bonus to Damage Checks

Tech:The technology type necessary to build this device.
  Hull: The number of hull points required by the system. Some systems require hull points equal to 5 percent ofsthe ship' total, so a ship of 240 hull points would require 12 hull points for a damage control system.
  Power:The number of power points required by one unit of this type, or one hull point of this system in the case- of a sys tem defined as a percentage of the hull. A ship dedicating 12 hull points to a damage control system requires 12 points of power to keep the system operational.
Cost:The cost for one unit of this system, or per hull point of a system based on a percentage of the hull.
  Coverage:The number of hull points one unit of this type can protect. For example, a deflection inducer covers 20 hull points, so a ship of 200 hull points needs 10 inducers to gain the protective benefits.



  If the ship changes its course or speed after deploying chaff, it leaves the cloud and loses the defensive benefits. The chaff system includes enough rockets for 4 chaff launches (although it's easy to buy multiple chaff systems and increase this to 8, 12, or more chaff launches).

cludes redundant systems, casualty control modes for major machinery, extra compartmentation, repair materi- als, and advanced monitoring systems throughout the ship. Equipping a ship with damage control systems re- quires 5 percent of the hull, but the ship gains a -2 step

Since large ships require more chaff for complete c-over bonus to all damage checks it must make. In other
age, the system is ineffective if there is not at least one	words, it's more likely to keep its systems operational
launcher per 100 hull points of the ship to be covered. For under heavy enemy fire. example, an armored cruiser of 500 hull points requires 5

chaff dispensers for basic coverage. If the shipbuilder -want ed to increase the system capacity from 4 launches to 8 launches, he'd have to buy 10 chaff dispensers.

Damage Control (PL 6)

Decoy Drone (PL 6)
This is a small, unmanned vehicle equipped with elec- tronic devices designed to mimic the EM and IR signa- ture of the launching ship. Launching a decoy drone forces any enemy ships to make a sensor check or

While all ships are equipped with some damage control break track on the launch ship. If the enemy succeeds,

provisions, this system represents a sophisticated and complete approach to compensating for damage. It in-

the drone is spotted and ignored. If the enemy fails, it can still fire at the launch ship, but there's a 50-50

chance that it targets the drone insteada.tuNrally, any successful hit destroys the drone and resolves the ene- my's uncertainty as to the true position of the ship that deployed the decoy drone.
  One hull point devoted to the decoy drone purchases a drone bay with three drones. Additional drones can be bought by installing this system multiple times. Since large ships require larger drone emitters, the drone bay must be 1 hull point in size for every 100 hull points of the launch


Number of Surviving Missiles
Attack	M	O	G	A
1 missile-	0	0	0
Salvo	-	2	1	0
Pattern 4	2	1	0
Flight	6 s	4 s	2 s	1 s

Missile flights are reduced to a number of salvos.-Ord

ship. For example, a battleship of 1,000 hull points requiresnance that "leaks through" the network attacks norm. ally

a drone bay of 10 hull points, which contains three bi-g de coy drones.

Jammer (PL 6)
A jammer system interferes with fire control radar and missile guidance systems. A ship equipped with a jam-
  
The defense network blocks one missile flight, four mine patterns, ten salvoes, or forty individual missile or min-e at tacks before it's exhausted. Since the constellation of -defen sive remotes can't maneuver, the ship loses its defens-e net work if it changes course or speed after deploying th-e re motes.
One hull point holds three cloud deployments (larger

mer can attempt to scramble missile seekers and enemyships need multiple hull points to hold three deployments
sensor checks. The jammer-equipped ship adds a +2	appropriate to their size). The shipbuilder can provide-addi
step penalty to enemy missile attacks and sensor checkst.ional deployments of the defense network by buying -multi

  Large ships require multipleCEM emitters to cover the entire hull. An armored cruiser of 500 hull points must purchase 5 jammers to use this system at all.

Magnetic Screen (PL 6)

ple systems.

Deflection Inducer (PL 7)
The deflection inducer surrounds the ship in belts of g- ravi tational energy intense enough to bend beam weapons

The first primitive energy shield, the magnetic screen uses away from the ship and stop projectiles cold. An o-pera

vast amounts of power to surround the ship with potent lines of magnetic force. While it's running, the magnetic screen adds a +2 step penalty to missile attack rolls and projectile weapon attack rolls. It has no effect on beam weapons or torpedoes.
  Large ships require multiple screen units to cover their larger hulls. Note that a ship may have only one kind of screen (magnetic, particle, deflection inducer, or ablative shield) active at any one time.

Stealth Hull (PL 6)

tional deflection inducer adds a +2 step penalty to all- ene my fire.
  Large ships require multiple inducers to cover the hull, so a ship of 40 hull points requires 2 inducers, a ship of 400 hull points requires 20 inducers, and so on. A ship may only have one type of screen (magnetic, particl-e, de flection inducer, or ablative shield) active at one time.

Particle Screen (PL 7)
This defensive device generates a shell or aura of alpha particles-helium nuclei stripped of their electrons. This

By coating the ship's hull in a soft covering of radar-ab- adds to the ship's armor rating by the following amounts:
sorbent material, the stealth hull makes it more difficult d4 (LI), d4 (HI), or d6 (En). Secondary damage is calculated
to detect the ship with radar or laser energy. Enemy ac- normally; the particle screen simply increases the ship-'s ar
tive sensor checks suffer a +2 step penalty against the mor roll by the appropriate amount.
stealth ship. Mass detectors, IR detectors, and EM detec- For example, a destroyer might be fitted with light ceram-

tors are not affected. Like many other systems, the stealth hull requires more hull points for larger ships.

Defense Network (PL 7)

etal armor, which stops d6 points of high-impact damage. If a particle screen also protects the destroyer, it stops d6 points of primary damage for the armor, plus an additional d4 points for the particle screen, for a total of 2 to 10 points.
A ship can't have more than one screen, shield, o-r de

This system consists of scores of small, disposable laserflection inducer active at the same time. Large ships require weapons deployed in a cloud surrounding the launching multiple screen units.
ship. Once deployed, the defense network is creates a

near-impenetrable screen against missile and mine at- tack. Each time a missile attack is made against the pro-

Stealth Shield (PL 7)

tected ship, make a crew check and consult the followingThe stealth shield is a sophisticated electromagnetic-trans

table:

ceiver that detects incoming EM energy from radars, ladars, and other sensor devices, and then generates an int-erfer

ence pattern to negate it. It also monitors the protected ship's own EM emissions and cloaks them in a similar manner. Finally, the stealth shield masks the ship's mass signature. A ship equipped with a stealth shield applies a
  
For example, a shielded ship is struck by a neutron gun for 6 points of mortal damage, which converts to 18 shield points. Next round, it's hit by three laser shots for 5 stun points each, raising the total in the capacitors to 33. The

+3 step penalty to all enemy sensor checks and missi-le at following round, a nuclear missile detonates nearby, i-nflict

tack rolls. Note that the stealth shield can't be used in- con junction with a jammer, although it can operate with chaff or a defense network.

Stardrive Scrambler (PL 7)

ing 4 critical points (another 20 shield points), for a total of 53 shield points into the ship's capacitors.
  When the ship's capacitors are full, the ablative shield automatically fails. There's just nowhere else for the energy to go. A hit may be partially ablated by a failing shield. If the ship's capacitors had 3 more shield points left and the

This device scrambles the distinctive mass signatures and ship was struck for 6 mortals, one point of mortal damage
drivespace resonances created when a ship enters -drive	would take up the last 3 shield points, and 5 mortals would
space, making it very difficult for a starfall detector to d- etercontinue through to affect the shielded ship. Thus, ablative

mine where the ship is bound when it makes the jump. This adds a +4 step penalty to the listening ship or- out

shields offer an impervious defense-for as long as th- e ca pacitors hold out.

post's sensor check to predict the departing vessel's de-stina Note that damage upgrades or downgrades due to- fire

tion. Naturally, the scrambler must be active and powered during the jump to mask the ship's signature.

Repair Bots (PL 7)

power versus toughness are applibeedforethe shield takes effect.
  Capacitor Bleed-off RateEs:ach round, capacitors bleed off 1 shield point of stored energy per 10 shield points- cur rently stored, with a minimum of 1 shield point per round.

In addition to the features described under the PL 6 version This takes place during the repair phase. If a ship is c-arry of damage control, the ship is equipped with a number of ro-ing 23 shield points in its capacitors, it loses 2 points, -drop

botic devices stored at various points throughout the hull. These bots are directly controlled by sophisticated damage control hardware and software. The repair bots can rapidly

ping to 21 shield points at the end of the round. This r-epre sents radiators, heat sinks, or energy grounds designed to dissipate stored energy harmles.sly

deploy to the damaged part of the ship and begin to effect re- Ablative Shields and ToughnesGsenerally,:	an ablative

pairs. This provides the ship with a -3 step bonus on any damage checks. In addition, the ship's engineer can repair stun or wound damage remotely-see "RepairsC"hianpter 1.

Ablative Shield (PL 8)
This device surrounds the ship in an energy field tha-t ab sorbs and dissipates attacks. In other words, it uses the

shield has the same toughness as the generating ship. Heavy ships produce heavy shields, for instance. How, ever it's possible to buy more ablative shield generators than are strictly necessary to generate a stronger shield (albeit at the cost of more power and space).
  A shield of at least three generators (6 hull points) is light toughness.
A shield of at least ten generators (20 hull points) is

ship's power to ablate attacks before they take their normalmediumtoughness.

effect. There are two components to an ablative shield: the generator and the capacit.or
The generator works much like other defensive devices;
  
A shield of at least thirty generators (60 hull points) is heavytoughness.
A shield of at least one hundred generators (200 hull

each unit purchased provides a certain amount of hull cover-points) is super-heavytoughness.
age and demands a certain amount of power. All of the ship's Energy CompilersT: he energy compiler is a refinement
generators must be powered to create the ablative shield.	or modification to the ablative shield capacitor. When a-n ab
The second component is a shield capacitor. Energy pour- lative shield backed by an energy compiler is struck b-y en
ing into the ship's shields needs to be diverted somewhere, emy fire, the compiler funnels some of the attack's energy
and so shield-protected ships often carry huge capacitors to back into the shield, reinforcing it and making it mor-e re store this energy until it can be safely discharged later. Eachsistant to damage. The energy compiler has a capacity of

hull point devoted to the capacitor can store up tosh1i0eld pointsof energy. This means that a shield generator is use- less without a capacitor to absorb the energy.
  Incoming damage converts into shield points as shown below:

Stun	1 point
Wound 2 points
Mortal 3 points
Critical 5 points

20 shield points per hull point, and reduces the powe-r re quirement for the ship's shield generators from 2 power points per unit to 1 power point per unit, provided there is some amount of energy stored in the compiler from p-revi ous enemy fire.

Cloaking Unit (PL 8)
This device is an improvement of the PL 7 stealth shield. It renders the ship essentially invisible in every known medium.

The cloaking unit imposes a +4 step penalty to enemy sensor checks and missile attack rolls. Obviously, the cloaking unit

Command Systems

can't be used in conjunction with a jammer or chaff bloom, since those devices would give away the ship's position.

Displacer (PL 8)

Before you install any of the systems described AonBLTE 5-13, you need to be aware that you must install either a cockpit or command deck on your ship. Larger ships require larger command decks. Regardless of how big your ship is, the command deck is large enough to ac-

Based on the spatial compression engine, the displacer is a commodate all personnel and all the system controls
device that "slides" the ship a few hundred meters several	necessary to fly and fight the ship.
times a second in a series of randomized local teleportations. You can buy a secondary or tertiary command deck if

All enemy attacks against the displacing ship suffer a +3 step penalty. Like most other defense systems, large ships may require multiple units to receive the defensive benefit.

Nanite Repair Arr  ay (PL 9)
The final refinement of damage control systems, the nanite repair array consists of nodules or blisters filled with- mi

you wish. In fact, most large warships (cruisers or big- ger) almost always have an auxiliary bridge or second- ary command deck, so that one lucky hit to the primary bridge won't completely incapacitate the ship.

Cockpit (PL 6)
The cockpit is the nerve center of a small ship. For half

croscopic repair machines scattered throughout the ship. It a hull point, it includes one control station or seat. The offers a -5 step bonus to all damage checks the protected maximum size of a cockpit is four seats or stations (2 ship must make. In addition, the ship's engineer can repair hull points). Anything larger than that is more accurately

stun, wound, or mortal damage remotely. SCeheapter 1.

STEP 9: COMMAND AND
CONTROL SYSTEMS

described as a small command deck. While it's theoreti- cally possible for a ship of several hundred hull points to be controlled by a single pilot in a one-seat cockpit through heavy automation, in practice a cockpit is just too small to handle anything larger than 50 hull points.
The cockpit includes a hatch (or sliding canopy) for

Sometimes referred to as "C-4" (command, communication,access, but it's not a full airlock. It also provides life sup-

computers, and control), command systems represent the brains of a ship. Power, armor, shields, and weapons are

port to its occupants, with a maximum duration of three days. Ships requiring more endurance than that must

important, but the command systems dictate just how-effec purchase a normal life support system. tively the warship can employ its armament.

Table 5-14:	Command,  Control,  and Communication Systems

SystemTechHullPowerCostNotesProgress Level 6: Fusion AgeCockpit-0.50$100 Kper station (max 3 stations)Command Deck-2+0$300 K/hull+1 hull point per 100 hull (max 10)Flag Bridge-30$50 K-Launch Tower-20$50 K-Laser Transceiver-11$50 K-Radio Transceiver-0.51$25 K-Progress Level 7: Gravity AgeMass TransceiverG11$100 K-Drivesat Comm ArrayG, C150300$2000 Minterstellar commsProgress Level 8: Energy AgeDrive TransceiverG22$200 K-Psionic TransceiverP12$150 K-Progress Level 9: Matter AgeAnsibleM44$1 Minstantaneous interstellar commsTech:The technology type necessary to build this device. Hull: The number of hull points required by the system.
Power:The number of power points required by one unit of this type.
Cost:The cost for one unit of this system, or per hull point of a system based on a percentage of the hull. Some systems are more expensive in larger installations.

Command Deck (PL 6)	Launch Tow er (PL 6)

Every ship requires either a cockpit or a command deck. A Carriers and other ships that carry a large number o-f em command deck begins at 2 hull points, and requires 1 extrabarked small craft usually set aside special facilities for hull point for each 100 hull points after the first 100 (a total controlling the launch and recovery of their fighters and

of 3 hull points for a ship of 100 or more hull points, 4 for a ship of 200 or more, and so on). However, a command

bombers. The launch tower is a center for coordinating the activities of small craft squadrons and maintaining "traffic

deck of 10 hull points can handle a ship of any size. A com-control" in the vicinity of the ship. mand deck includes three seats or stations per hull point.

  In a pitched battle, enemy fire may knock out the ship' bridge or command deck. Many ships install an auxiliary

The Computer Cor e

command deck as a little bit of insurance against that luckyBasic systems monitoring, navigation, and engineering- con

hit. All command functions are duplicated in the auxiliary bridge. It takes one round to switch command from one bridge to anothe.r
  The command deck includes an airlock for exterio-r ac cess, if the ship designer wants one there.

Flag Bridge (PL 6)
Many armored cruisers, battleships, carriers, or d-read

trols require some amount of computer support. Any ship equipped with a cockpit or command deck possesses built- in computers with the bare minimum of computing power necessary to fly the ship.
  However, it's possible to install computers that add- sub stantially to the ship's combat abilities. You can install a computer core of Ordinary or better quality if you so choose. A computer core is necessary to support dedicated control computers, which are computers that enhance the

noughts are equipped with a flag bridge-a command deckfunctioning of one particular system. For example, a fire
with facilities for coordinating the actions of an entire fleet control computer may be installed to provide bonuses-to at
of ships. The flag bridge eliminates penalties applied to- Tactack rolls with one particular weapon system. The quality of tics skill checks by the squadron commander or fleet -admi the control computer can't exceed the quality of thesship'
ral due to command and control limitations; sCeheapter 3.	computer core. In other words, if you want to install a Good

Table 5-14a:	Computers

SystemTechHullPowerCostNotesProgress Level 6: Fusion AgeComputer Core, OrdinaryC11$500 K/hull1 required per 200 hull pointsFire Control, OrdinaryC10$200 K/hull*-1 step bonus to dedicated weaponSensor Control, OrdinaryC10$200 K/hull*-1 step bonus to dedicated sensorTac Control, OrdinaryC10$100 K-1 step bonus to Tactics skill checksNav Control, OrdinaryC10$500 K-1 step bonus to Maneuver checksProgress Level 7: Gravity AgeAttack ComputerC0.50$200 K-1 step bonus to attack rollsComputer Core, GoodC11$1 M/hull1 required per 200 hull pointsFire Control, GoodC10$300 K/hull*-2 step bonus to dedicated weaponSensor Control, GoodC10$300 K/hull*-2 step bonus to dedicated sensorTac Control, GoodC10$200 K-2 step bonus to Tactics skill checksNav Control, GoodC10$750 K-2 step bonus to Maneuver checksProgress Level 8: Energy AgeComputer Core, AmazingC11$2 M/hull1 required per 200 hull pointsFire Control, AmazingC10$300 K*-3 step bonus to dedicated weaponSensor Control, AmazingC10$300 K*-3 step bonus to dedicated sensorTac Control, AmazingC10$400 K-3 step bonus to Tactics skill checksNav Control, AmazingC10$1 M-3 step bonus to Maneuver checks
* Per hull point of the system the computer is dedicated to.

Tech:The technology type necessary to build this device. Hull: The number of hull points required by the system.
Power:The number of power points required by one unit of this type.
Cost:The cost for one unit of this system, or per hull point of a system based on a percentage of the hull.

92 fire control system for your ship's strong force guns, you

some kind of tactical display-a flat screen or holo di.splay



Computer Core (PL 6-9)
While the most advanced computer cores are available at the higher Progress Levels, you don't have to install the best computer core available into a ship. It's perfect-ly ac ceptable to install no computer core at all in a PL 9 ship, especially if the ship is a bulk freighter or hauler that isn't intended to come anywhere near a fight. However, most

Nav Control (PL 6-8)
The nav computer adds a -1, -2, or -3 step bonus to- ma neuver checks and Navigatiosny-stem astrogationor Navi- gation-drivespace astrogatiosnkill checks. It continuously calculates potential course changes and helps the pilot to evaluate the effectiveness of various maneuvers in mid- round.

warships carry the best computers they can fit into the hull. The computer core itself does not add any bonuses to the ship's combat rolls, but it enables dedicated control systems


Attack Computer (PL 7)

(the rest of the computers described here) to do so. In- addiThis unit combines a small computer core with a small fire

tion, a computer core is the equivalent of the following computer types described Cinhapter 10 of theALTERNITY Player's Handbook:

Core	 Equivalent to... Ordinary	Mainframe (Ord) Good	 Mainframe (Good) Amazing Mainframe (Ama)

control computer slaved to one single weapon system. The dedicated weapons gain a -1 step bonus to all attack rolls. Weapons totaling more than 5 hull points are simply too big for the attack computer to handle; this system -is de signed for fighters, bombers, and other small craft in which space is at a premium.

Communications

Computer cores require 1 hull point per 200 hull points A large ship may require dozens of transceivers to co-ordi
of the ship. For example, a battlecruiser (1000 basic hull	nate a task force, maintain communications with nearby
points) requires a computer core of 5 hull points. The cost ships, and maintain control over a distant flight of strike

in hull points reflects networking, work stations, wiring closets, shock mountings, climate control, and other-para phenalia.

fighters.



Laser Transceiver (PL 6)

Fire Control (PL 6-9)

The signal laser uses a beam of coherent light to transmit messages. The laser is extremely directional; the signal

A dedicated fire control computer adds a -1, -2, or -3 stepcan't be intercepted or jammed unless it's beamed directly

bonus to attack rolls made with one weapon battery. A weapon battery is defined as all weapon installations that are identical to each other. For example, a ship with three

at a hostile ship or station. If the comm officer doesn't know exactly where the receiving station is, the laser transceiver is a waste of power-you can't use this for a genera-l dis

hypermass cannons, six plasma cannons, and one launch tress call to all stations in the area, for instance.
cell array could define three different batteries: the h-yper	A ship can't receive laser communications unless it is
mass cannons, the plasma cannons, and the launch c-ell ar equipped with the transceiver. Lasers are limited to the

ray. Similarly, a ship armed with two launch racks could combine both under the same fire control comp.uter

speed of light (8 AU or 1 million megameters per hour).

  Large weapon systems require a more expensive fire con- trol installation, although it doesn't take any more hull points.

Radio Transceiver (PL 6)


Sensor Control (PL 6-8)

The radio transceiver is an advanced, frequency-agile set that transmits in either LOS (line of sight) or omnidirectional mode. Like the laser, it's limited to the speed of light.-A ra

A dedicated sensor control computer adds a -1, -2, or -3 dio transceiver can handle up to ten simultaneous two-way
step bonus to sensor checks made with one sensor system.conversations, so ships with unusually large comm- de Special filter and enhancement routines account for th- e su mands often purchase multiple transceivers.
perior sensor sensitivi.ty


Tac Control (PL 6-8)
This computer collects data from a number of different

Mass Transceiver (PL 7)
This device can transmit instantaneously to any point in the same star system, with no "lag" due to FTL limitations. How-

sources and presents a synthesized diagram or summary inever, its range is limited to about 1,000 AU, so the signal

can't cross interstellar space. A ship must be equipped with aas psionic activity, so the character can't recover psionic	93

mass transceiver to receive mass-burst communications.

Drivesat Comm Arr ay (PL 7)
This massive installation provides Gravity Age ships o-r sta tions with a very potent capability-interstellar commu- nica tions. The drivesat array consists of a constellation of

energy points while he's on watch.
  Using the transceiver to send messages requires a- suc cessful Telepathyco- ntactskill check, with the following modifiers:

Target	Modifier
Same system	-3 step bonus

dozens of drive satellites, small stardrive-equipped tran- smit ters that enter drivespace, transmit and receive messages, and then surface again. It enableTsLFcomms with a range
of 50 light-years. Any signal takes 11 hours to reach its destination. Naturally, only a ship or station similarly equipped can receive the drivesat's signal.
  To transmit and receive messages, the ship must remain stationary. If the ship moves while its drivesats are cycling,

1-5 LY distant	0
6-10 LY distant	+1 step penalty
11-20 LY distant	+2 step penalty
21-30 LY distant	+3 step penalty
31-50 LY distant	+4 step penalty
51-100 LY distant	+5 step penalty

It costs 1 PEP per 5 light-years for a communication

10-40 percent (d4 x 10 percent) of its constellation will be of 1 minute. Communication is instantaneous and two-

lost in drivespace. The ship cannot transmit or receive while it's in drivespace itself. Despite these limitations, the

way, if the receiving character wishes to spend psionic energy points to respond; otherwise, communication is

drivesat array is about the best way to send a message to one-way.

another star system at PL. 7

Driv e Transceiver (PL 8)
The drive transceiver is the first interstellar communication
  
Unlike the other communication systems described here, the psionic transceiver can't transmit anything that a human character couldn't transmit in speech. Com- pressed data files, technical diagrams, or tactical read- outs can't be sent-unless the ship's mindwalker also has

device that's practical for small ships or second-rate coloniest.he datalinkspecialty skill, in which case he may make Like the drivesat comm array of PL 7, it can send a signal upa skill check to successfully transmit the nonverbal ma-

to 50 light-years distant. It takes 11 hours for the signal to reach the target station, which must also be equipped with a drive transceiver. The drive transceiver can neither transmit nor receive while the ship itself is in drivespace.

terial.



Ansible (PL 9)

  The drive transceiver is cheaper and smaller than its predecessor by an order of magnitude.

Psionic Transceiver (PL 8)

The ansible is a device that induces precise energy state changes in atomic nuclei without regard to distance or time. In effect, it permits instantaneous interstellar communica- tions-voice, video, or data transfer-to any other ship or sta- tion equipped with an ansible. Much like a radio, the receiv-

This device consists of a special array of psi-enhancin-g de ing station has to be attentive to a particular "frequency", so

vices that make it possible for a mindwalker with the Telepathy broad skill to communicate over interstella-r dis tances. The receiving station must also have a telepath equipped with a psionic transceiver, or the ship's mind-walk er is wasting his time.
Monitoring the transceiver for incoming message-s re

the two ansible-equipped stations must have some pre- arranged communications protocols; the ansible can't pick up any transmissions not intended for that specific station.

STEP 10: SENSORS

quires the mindwalker's attention, although he can go aboutAny experienced spacehand can tell you that winning the other duties as long as he wears the headset that links himinformation battle is every bit as crucial as winning the
to the transceiver. Guarding the psionic frequencies counts armament battle. Without good information on the enemy's
course, speed, and capabilities, even the most powerful weapon system is virtually useless.
  It's highly advisable to purchase at least one air/space radar set. This is the minimum necessary to practice safe navigation in heavily trafficked areas and hazardou-s re gions such as asteroid belts or ring systems. If you're -build ing anything more militant than an ore hauler, you probably want to equip your ship with the best sensors money can buy. Seeing the enemy before he sees you is simply too significant an advantage to skimp on sensors.

94

Progress Level 6: Fusion AgeAir/space Radar-0.51$20 KActive5/10/20 Mm1NormalEM Detector-0.50$20 KPassive10/20/60 Mm2+3 step penaltyHi-Res Video-0.50$10 KPassive1/2/10 Mm1+2 step penaltyIR Detector-0.50$20 KPassive2/4/8 Mm1+2 step penaltyLadar-11$100 KActive5/10/30 Mm1NormalProbe-10$200 KRemoteSpecial4-Progress Level 7: Gravity AgeMass DetectorG11$100 KPassive10/30/50 Mm2+1 step penaltyMultiband Radar-0.51$50 KActive10/20/40 Mm1NormalProbe, advancedC10$500 KRemoteSpecial4-Remote NetworkC22$750 KRemoteSpecial4-Spectroanalyzer-11$100 KActiveSpecial1NoneDrive Detection ArrayG, C80120$1000 MPassiveSpecial4NoneProgress Level 8: Energy AgeCE Passive ArrayC21$1 MPassive30/60/100 Mm2NormalDrive DetectorG44$500 KPassiveSpecial4NoneMadarG11$200 KActive20/30/40 Mm1NormalMultiphase RadarQ10$250 KActive20/40/80 Mm1NormalOmniscience SphereP31$2 MPassive50 Mm4Normal










Sensor Arcs


at the same time. In most space battles, this isn't a-prob lem-there aren't more than a half-dozen contacts tha-t mat

Sensor systems have "arcs of fire", much like weapons-: for ter at any one time. In large battles, tracking capabili-ty be ward, port, starboard, and aft. However, many sensors cancomes crucial.

cover more than one arc at a time. For example, the drive detector automatically covers all four sensor arcs; it's an
  
If a sensor system is currently maxed out on its tracking capability and new targets appear, the sensor operator must

omnidirectional installation that doesn't require any special choose whether or not he will "drop track" on an existing

provisions to achieve a 360 degree coverage of the- sur rounding area.

contact to attempt a sensor check against one of the new targets. SeeChapter 2: Advanced Combfaotr details.

Extending the coverage of a sensor system from one arc Tracking capability is a function of the Progress Level at
to multiple arcs is simple: Just buy more. Four 1-arc- sys	which the ship (not the sensor!) is constructed and the-qual
tems provide coverage of all four sensor arcs, as do two 2-ity of any dedicated sensor control computer assigned to the arc systems. Obviously, a sensor system can't make a- sen system.

sor check against a target that's outside its current arc, so it's a good idea to provide plenty of coverage for search radars and threat receivers.

Tracking Capability
  
For example, a PL 7 ship with a Good-quality sensor- con trol computer can track 20 targets simultaneo.usly
  A shipbuilder can increase the tracking capability of his ship's sensors by purchasing multiple sensor systems. For example, a PL 6 cruiser with an EM detector can track up to 6 targets with that sensor, but if the shipbuilder installs 4

Unless otherwise stated in the system description, all sensoErM detectors, he increases the ship's tracking capability to
systems are limited in their ability to track multiple targets 24 targets with the EM detec.tor

  Purchasing extra sensor sets to cover additional arcs counts toward increasing the ship's tracking capability with

Hi-Res Video (PL 6)

that type of sensor. In other words, you can increase from This is a high-powered camera system designed to spot tar- one to two arcs and double your tracking capability by- pur gets by their visual profile. It includes a very powerful zoom chasing one extra sensor set instead of three extra sensor feature, allowing close inspection of far-off targets. It's not a

sets.


Sensor Range

very good targeting or sensor system, but it's perfect for evaluating damage the target has suffered. It's hard to find a system that provides a bettelorok at an object of interest.

Like weapons, sensor systems possess short, medium, and long ranges. sensor checks at medium range suffer a +1

IR Detector (PL 6)

step penalty, and sensor checks at long range suffer a +3 step penalt.y

Sensor Systems
For ships of 30 hull points or less, it's a good idea to set aside 1 or 2 hull points for sensor systems requiring hull space. Larger ships should set aside anywhere from 2 to 10 hull points for sensors. Redundant sensors are also a good idea-you don't want your super-dreadnought to be

Also known as a heat sensor, the infrared detector looks for targets that are radiating infrared energy-heat. It confers a -2 step bonus to sensor checks against targets mane-uver ing with a fission rocket, fusion torch, ion engine, or-anti matter rocket.

Ladar (PL 6)
A laser detection and ranging system uses low-powered laser beams to pinpoint the target. Ladar ignores jamming,

incapacitated by the lucky hit that takes out its only sensor and it's considered a passive sensor if the target does not
system.	itself possess ladar or a laser transceiver.

Air/Space Radar (PL 6)	Probe (PL 6)
The minimal sensor system acceptable on a spaceship hull,The sensor probe is a small rocket fitted with a video the air/space radar is the most common sensor system of camera and a small air/space radar set. It has an accel-

the Fusion Age. It works equally well in atmospheres or open space.

EM Detector (PL 6)
The electronmagnetic detector is an antennae arra-y de signed to detect and localize EM emissions such as radio signals and radar beams. If the target is using active- sen

eration of .05 Mpp per phase (or 50 KPH per phase) and enough fuel to operate for up to 48 hours after launch. The probe's telemetry package allows it to trans- mit its video and radar data up to 100 Mm without degradation, and up to 1,000 Mm (1 million kilometers) with reasonably clear results.
  A common tactic in Fusion Age space battles is to launch several probes before contact and activate the

sors, the EM detector gains a -2 step bonus on the sensor probe radar sets, while leaving the ship on passive sen-
check.	sors. This allows the ship to gain the benefits of active
It's possible to detect targets that aren't active by listeningtargeting without making itself easier to detect.

for drive emissions and miscellaneous radio noise, bsut it' harder-the EM detector suffers a +2 step penalty when used against nonradiating targets.
  
Each probe bay contains four probes. They can be re- placed at a cost of 40 K each.



Table 5-16:  Tracking Capability

Sensor Control Computer
PLNoneOGAPL 65102040PL 7102040unlimitedPL 8204080unlimited
PL: The Progress Level at which the ship is built.
Sensor Control ComputeTr:he quality of the sensor control computer dedicated to the system. #: The number of contacts the system can track simultane.ously

Mass Detector (PL 7)
  
The location of the arrival or departure is also recorded, although the sensor operator can't tell where the arriving


tures. Even though a spaceship has an infinitesimal mass detection array does not function while the array-equipped
compared to a planet, a sufficiently sensitive sensor ca-n deship is traveling in drivespace itself. termine its bearing and approximate range by measuring

the target's influence on the sensing ship.

Multiband Radar (PL 7)
This is a more powerful and sophisticated version of the air/space rada.r

Probe, Ad vanced (PL 7)

Spectroanalyzer (PL 7)
While the spectroanalyzer isn't useful as a targeting se, nsor it is a powerful analytical tool. It combines spectrum a-naly sis of visible light, radar mapping, and precise mass m- eas urements to create a profile of a planet or space object. The spectroanalyzer is an active sensor that confers a -2 step bonus on sensor checks for Battle Damage Assessment (see Chapter 2) and any Physical Sciencea-stronomy or plane-

Obviously, this is a PL 7 version of the probe. It has a-n ac tologyskill checks for the purpose of determining the mass,

celeration of 2 Mpp per phase (or 2000PHKper phase) and enough power to operate for up to 72 hours after

composition, or characteristics of a space object.
Ship-sized objects may be examined at distances of

launch. The probe's telemetry package allows it to transmit2/4/16 Mm for short/medium/long range on the sensor

its video and radar data up to 1,000 Mm without deg-rada tion, and up to 1 AU (150 million kilometers) with a-rea sonably clear results.
  Each probe bay contains four probes. They can b-e re placed at a cost of 100 K each.

Remote Network (PL 7)

check; planets may be examined at ranges of 1/5/2U5sA for short/medium/long range.

CE Passiv e Arr ay (PL 8)
This system collates and analyzes all electromagnetic-ener gy received by the sensor. It combines the properties of an EM, IR, and video scan and receives a -4 step bonus to

The remote network is a constellation of sensor probes thatdetect a target using active sensors. can be deployed in a ring or globe thousands of kilometers

in diameter. This doubles the range of one other sensor system designated at the time the remote network-is in stalled, so it's possible to have a network that doubles the

Drive Detector (PL 8)
The drive detector works much like the drive detectio-n ar

range of the ship's EM detector, or its air/space radar, or itsray of the Gravity Age, but it's much smaller and che.aper mass detecto.r

  It only takes one round to deploy the remote sensors. The remotes stay active for one day before their batteries

Mass Radar (PL 8)

are exhausted. Since the constellation of sensors can-'t ma Sometimes abbreviated as "madar", the mass radar uses

neuver, the ship loses its remote network if it changes course or speed after deployment.

pulses of gravitational energy to precisely range and- pin point objects. It also has the ability to detect objects buried

  The remote network system holds six constellations in itsbeneath radar-reflective surfaces. The mass radar can- pen two hull points. The shipbuilder can provide three additionael trate up to 100 kilometers of ice or water, 20 kilometers deployments of the remote network per additional hull pointof normal stone or rock, or 2 kilometers of nickel-iron or assigned to the system. Each extra hull point costs 250 K. similarly dense and metal-rich rock. This makes the mass
radar ideal for locating bases or facilities buried dee-p un

Drive Detection Arr  ay (PL 7)
Based on the same technology as the drivesat comm,relay the drive detection array provides a ship with the ability to

derground.

Multiphase Radar (PL 8)

detect events occurring across interstellar distances-s-pecifiThis radar system works much like the multiband radar of cally, the starfalls and starrises of ships traveling by meansPL 7, but it's even more powerful and sophisticated. Due to
of a stardrive, drivewave generator, or jump drive.	its track-with-scan capabilities, the multiphase radar has a
  The drive detection array has a range of fifty light-years. Itracking capability 50 percent higher than normal. takes eleven hours for the "splash" of the ship entering or

emerging from drivespace to propagate, so the drive detec- tion array doesn't provide real-time information. However, it

Omniscience Sphere (PL 8)

does indicate the class of ship traveling (small, light, mediumB, ased on rare psi-technology, the omniscience sphere is a
heavy, or super-heavy) and the number of ships traveling.	sensor device that automatically detects any and all objects

that approach within 50 megameters of the ship or station.	Note:You may exceed this limit if you wish, but if the	97
lay his findings to the ship's computers for fire control-solu point total for purposes of calculating maneuverability and

tions and detailed tracking predictions.
  The omniscience sphere must be manned by a psionic character who possesses the broad skill SofP.EThe char- acter cannot rest or meditate while plugged in to the sphere. Operating the sphere requires 2 psionic energy

FTL travel.
  For example, a 400-hull point ship with 20 docking clamps could carry as much as 200 hull points of-em barked craft. However, this means that its 40-hull poin- t en gines-10 percent of the hull, in normal circumstances-now

points per hour. Usually, ships with this sensor system will comprise only 6.67 percent of the total hull points. (This

employ a team of "SEPers" to continuously man the sphere while underwa.y

STEP 11: HANGARS AND
SMALL CRAFT
Almost all ships of destroyer size or larger carry a couple

rounds down to 5 percent.) In this case, the carrier p-roba bly loses some of its acceleration and travels at a slower FTL rate while all those embarked craft are alongside.

Hangar (PL 6)
The hangar is an internal docking, launch, storage, and service facility for embarked craft. It requires 1 hull point

of small craft-a launch, pinnace, gig, or a scout fighter-tofor each hull point of embarked craft, so a super-carrier

get into places that the ship itself can't go. In fact, many warships rely on small craft as their exclusive main a-rma ment. Big carriers may embark hundreds of fighters and strike fighters.
If your ship design includes any room for embarked

with a hangar of 1000 hull points could carry 100 fight- ers of 10 hull points each. Regardless of the hangar ca- pacity, a ship of 100 hull points or more is simply too big to fit into any other ship's hangar.
A hangar is not anywhere near as efficient as a set of

small craft, you should also design the fighters and la-unch exterior docking clamps for carrying a large number of es your ship carries. You can save some time by usin-g ex craft. However, it has several advantages. The embarked

isting small craft designs.

Docking Clamps (PL 6)

ships are stored inside the carrier's hull, and cannot be targeted by enemy weapons (although the carrier itself can certainly be attacked). Second, the carrier can freely enter planetary atmospheres while its embarked craft are

The docking clamp is a hardpoint and airlock where a-noth inside the ship.

er ship can secure itself to the hull. The maximum capacity of a docking clamp is 10 hull points per 2 hull point-s in

Last but not least, embarked craft carried in a hangar
do notcount toward the ship's hull points, and have no ef-

stalled; a docking clamp capable of securing ships of up to fect on the carrier's acceleration or FTL travel rates.

30 hull points would require 3 docking clamps, or one docking clamp purchased at three times the normal size
  
Hangars may launch or recover no more than one craft per phase per hangar; some ships divide their

and cost. Ships mated to docking clamps can disengage in hangar space among two or more hangars so that em-

a single phase.
  Many carriers are built with their fighters carried on docking clamps. Not only does this save a lot of space, it also allows all the fighters to disengage simultaneously-

barked craft can be launched and recovered at a faster rate.
  At Progress Levels 6 or 7, the hangar must be depres- surized to launch or recover embarked craft. However, if

there's no restriction on the number of embarked craft that PL 8 technology of type Q or M is available, the hangar

can be launched in one round in this fashion.
  Docking clamps have several drawbacks. First, the em- barked ships are outside the carrier's hull and are not pro- tected by its armor, bulk, or life support. Repair work or service to the embarked craft must be carried out in e-suits

can be sealed by energy screens. This allows the ship to launch straight to space without exposing the hangar to vacuum.

Magazine (PL 6)

under vacuum conditions, which is hazardous and inefficient.
Second, it's impossible to enter a planetary atmosphere Just because a carrier embarks 50 fighters armed with
while embarked craft are attached to docking clamps. The matter bombs, it doesn't mean that there are more matter

craft must be detached and flown down separately, or parked in a convenient orbit for retrieval when the carrier leaves the atmosphere again.
  Finally, the embarked ships may not exceed more than 10 percent of the carrier's hull. In other words, a 400-hull point cruiser can carry up to 40 hull points of embarked craft, but no more.

bombs lying around for the fighters to rearm and strike again. Carriers whose embarked craft rely on dropped ordnance or missiles require vast ordnance stores to sus- tain any kind of prolonged hostilities. Each hull point spent on magazines can store 4 size points of missiles, mines, or bombs.

98


















STEP 12: MISCELLANEOUS
INSTALLATIONS
The last systems a shipbuilder normally considers are the miscellaneous facilities that don't really fit into any other category. Some of these may be crucial to the ship's- mis

bunkroom, docking clamp, hangar, cargo hold, or ordnance transfer system; additional airlocks may be purchased at a cost of 1 hull point and 10 K each.

Brig (PL 6)
Think of the brig as accommodations for undesirable- pas

sion; a heavy freighter should buy its cargo space first, andsengers. Each two hull points devoted to the brig provides

its defensive armament second.

Airlock (PL 6)
A small compartment with two heavy-duty hatches-one

individual cells for four individuals, plus a security station, interrogation room, visiting area, and alarm system in case any of the guests decides to leave.

Cargo Space (PL 6)

leading outside the ship, the other leading inside-the airlock
also includes the pumps and controls necessary to pre-ssur One hull point provides enough space for 10 cubic meters ize or depressurize the room. A ship automatically includesof cargo, or one cargo unit. A compartment 2 meters tall, 2
one free airlock per command deck, crew quarters, crew  meters wide, and 2.5 meters deep would be typical for 1

hull point of cargo space. Simply buying this system m- ulti ple times can purchase more cargo space.

Cargo Bay (PL 6)

water (which can be processed into hydrogen) can be found on planets, moons, and comets as ice or liquid wa- ter. Each fuel collector unit can process enough fuel to fill a 1 hull- point tank in one day, provided the ship spends that day engaged in fueling operations-siphoning water,

Two hull points provide enough space for 50 cubic meters mining ice, or skimming gas giant cloud-tops.
of cargo, or five cargo units. This is more efficient than two Note that a ship trying to fill several hundred hull
one-hull point cargo space because systems such as- bulk points of fuel tanks will take months to completely fuel
heads, hatches, monitoring, and climate control don't need with only one fuel collector system. Large ships should to be duplicated in the larger cargo bay. A space 4 meters carry several fuel collectors to fuel in a reasonable

wide, 2.5 meters tall, and about 5 meters deep is re-ason able for a cargo bay. A cargo bay can be made larger by purchasing the system multiple times.
  The cargo bay includes an exterior hatch, although this isn't an airlock.

Cargo Hold (PL 6)
Three hull points provide space for 100 cubic meters of cargo, or ten cargo units. This is more efficient than three one-point cargo spaces, or even a two-point bay plus a one-point space. An area 2.5 meters tall, 4 meters wide,

amount of time.

Lab Section (PL 6)
The lab section consists of a small number of offices,-labo ratories, and conference rooms suited for various types of scientific work. Four scientists or technicians can work-com fortably in this space, and as many as a dozen can use it with significant crowding. General-purpose instruments and recording devices are also included.
  An Ordinary-quality mainframe (seCehapter 10 of the ALTERNITYPlayer's Handboo)kis included in the cost of this

and about 10 meters deep is reasonable for a 3-point hold.system. It contains databases on the broad skills of Physical
Large ships might purchase a cargo hold several times to Science, Life Science, and Technical Science.

create a hold with a capacity of 500 or 1,000 cubic meters.
  The cargo hold includes a large cargo or vehicula-r air lock for exterior access.


Reentry Capsule (PL 6)


Escape Pod (PL 6)

A reentry capsule is an emergency escape device with room for two people. After ejection, the capsule has enough air and survival supplies for ten days. It drifts

The escape pod is a stripped-down version of the boardingthrough space, or it can de-orbit and make planetfall if it pod. It can carry ten people, and it includes 100 man-days was launched within 10,000 kilometers of a planet's

of air and supplies. It's equipped with an emergenc-y dis tress beacon and an automated landing program that will

surface.

get its passengers to a planetary surface if there isn't a pilot on board. The power cells allow up to 6 hours of flight.

Sick Bay (PL 6)


Hangar (PL 6)

This is a small shipboard hospital with care and treat- ment facilities for up to four in-patients. Buying the sick bay multiple times increases its capacity accordingly, so

The hangar is an enclosed, internal space where small crafat 10-hull point sick bay can accommodate 20 beds. The can be stored, maintained, launched, and recovered. -Its ca sick bay includes a small operating theater, a reasonable

pacity is one hull point of small craft per hull point all-ocat ed to the system, so a 200-hull point hangar could carry 20 10-hull point fighters.
The hangar itself is a triple-airlock that can be opened

supply of medical equipment and supplies, and constant vitals monitoring for all patients. The sick bay qualifies as a facility of Ordinary (-1 step), Good (-2 step) or Amazing (-3 step bonus) quality for Medical Science-

to space, sealed from space, or sealed with a portion open treatmentor surgeryskill checks at Progress Levels 6, 7,

to space for launch and recovery of small craft.

Fuel Collectors (PL 6)

and 8, respectively.

Workshop (PL 6)

Many Fusion Age systems require large amounts of h-ydro The workshop is a small but lavishly equipped machine
gen fuel. A ship could be stranded without propulsion or	shop for repair work, light manufacturing, and special -fabri
power by exhausting its fuel supply in a system lacking anycation jobs. A shipboard workshop makes it possible-to at

kind of fuelling facilities.
  A fuel collector system allows a ship to process fuel from sources found even in the most desolate star sys-

tempt repairs of mortal damage in space, but any su-ch at tempts suffer a +3 step pena.lty

tems. Gas giants hold incredible reserves of hydrogen, and

100

Accumulator (PL 7)	Fabrication Facility (PL 7)
The accumulator stores extra power points. Each hull point This facility is a large, automated workshop with a m-anu can store up to 10 excess power points, which can be allo- facturing computer that holds design specs for thousands of

cated or spent just like normal power points in the power	useful devices and critical machinery. Virtually any part or
distribution phase. However, once the accumulator's stored component of the ship can be duplicated by the fabrication
power points have been allocated, they're unavailable until facility. Not only is the facility useful for creating special-
the accumulator is recharged in a subsequent power distri- purpose tools, furniture, or repair parts, it also makes- pos
bution phase. Accumulators are useful for providing ships sible the repair of mortal damage to the ship withou- t re
with quick one-shot recharges on high-powered weapons orturning to a shipyard. extra power for maneuverability in an emergency situation.


Autocargo (PL 7)
Consisting of automated cargo loading and handling- ma chinery, the autocargo system provides service to cargo holds, bays, or spaces totaling 6 hull points or less.- It al lows the rapid loading or unloading of cargo, handling heavy or awkward loads with ease.

Boarding Pod (PL 7)

Ordnance Transfer System (PL 7)
The ship is equipped with a special airlock and ordnance transfer crane or tractor beam. It can reload external missile racks, bomb racks, or ordnance cells in d4 x 10 minutes, in- stead of d4 hours. Ammo carriers are often fitted with this sys- tem to permit faster reloading of expended missiles and bombs.

Security Suite (PL 7)
The ultimate in shipboard security, this suite of protective

The boarding pod is a small assault module equipped with devices includes video, sound, and thermal monitoring of all gravity induction engine powered by a large lanthanide cell.protected compartments by surveillance computers. All
It can hold ten troops in normal gear, or six troops in body doors in the protected area are heavy-duty armored s-ecuri

tanks.
The boarding pod has an acceleration of 0.5, a Ma- neu

ty hatches that can be set to open by key card, retinal scan, or positive control from the ship's security center. Fi,nally

verability Class of 2, and enough power to sustain flight foreach security suite purchased includes four weapon cupolas up to 10 game rounds. This means that it's generally used that can be used to mount any ranged or heavy weapon against targets that aren't maneuvering or accelerating anyfrom thePlayer's Handbookin strategic locations such as more. The pod can be "flown" remotely from the launching airlocks, passage intersections, or vital compartments.

ship, or controlled by a pilot with the Vehicle Osppsa-cecraft skill. It has 5/5/2 stun/wound/mortal points, Good to-ugh
  
While it's possible to protect the entire hull of a large system with security suites, it's more cost-efficient to create

ness, and 1d4 points of external armor against all types of "security zones" or "security decks" to guard vital areas or damage. The power cells can provide 6 hours of flight and control access throughout the ship, leaving most of the hull
up to 48 hours of life support.	with routine security measures and monitoring.

  When the pod reaches its target, it uses a set of me-chan ical grapples to fasten itself to the enemy's hull. It doesn't have any facilities for cutting into the enemy ship, but the


Stabilizer (PL 7)

marines on board normally carry shaped charges or laser torches to make their entrance. This normally takes 1d4

The stabilizer is a modification to the ship's engine system that increases its maneuverability. A ship equipped with a

rounds, although it depends a lot on what kind of gear the powered stabilizer increases its base Maneuverability Class

boarders have and what they're trying to get into.

Evac System (PL 7)

by 1 point. For example, a fighter with a stabilizer is- Ma neuverability Class 5, not 4.
  The stabilizer requires 5 percent of the hull, and 1 -pow er point per hull point of the system. For example, a

This is a system of four escape pods, designed to serve a corvette of 80 hull points requires a stabilizer of 4 hull

large ship. Each has a capacity of 10 people, carries 100 man-days of air and supplies, and can sustain up to 6 hours of independent flight with an acceleration of 1. An automated landing program can bring the pod to a plsanet' surface if there isn't a pilot available.

points, consuming 4 points of pow. er

Holofield Bay (PL 8)
The ultimate in personal entertainment, the holofield bay uses

The system can be expanded for larger ships. Each-addivirtual matter and holoprojection technology to create fully
tional hull point provides two more life pods, at a cost of	immersive virtual reality. Sometimes the verisimilitude of the
50,000. Most warships and liners carry enough evacuationsetting is not completely perfect, but it's good enough for ex-

pods to provide all hands a chance to escape a majo- r ca tastrophe in space.

tremely realistic training (-2 step bonus to Teach skill checks made with holofield bay classrooms) and just having fun.

Nanomanufacture Bay (PL 8)
The final step in shipboard manufacturing and repair-tech nology, the nanomanufacture bay combines many of the fabrication facility's machines with a nanite tank-a large fluid-filled chamber in which a matrix of microscopi-c de vices can construct virtually anything imaginable from the
  
You can indicate multiple mounts simply by drawing one arrow per barrel extending from the mount symbol.

DAMAGE  DIAGRAM
The final step of the ship construction process is to build your ship's hit location chart. This chart indicates what

101

crudest raw materials. The ship's engineer gains a -1 stepsystems on the ship are located near each other and bonus to repair checks to repair mortal damage, despite themight be endangered by hits to a particular portion of

fact that a shipyard is normally required to effect suc-h re pairs.

STEP 13: A DDING IT UP
When you finish with your first pass on a ship design,

the ship's hull. It's intended to be somewhat abstract, since a hit in one part of a ship might cause cascading damage or systems failures in an entirely different part of the ship.

Step A:  Define Zones

you'll probably find that you've spent too many hull points
or that your ship doesn't have enough power to fight effi- Every ship is broken up into a number of zones. A zone
ciently. You may need to throw out some features that	serves no purpose other than identifying roughly where in
seemed like interesting accessories, or possibly reduce theor on a ship a particular system is located.

ship's armament or defenses, to fit everything into the hull. Similarly, if the finances available in the campaign
  
Small craft of 20 hull points or less have two zones: fore (F) and aft (A).

are a serious restriction, the ship may be too expensive to Small craft of more than 20 hull points have four

be practical. You may need to look for cheaper alterna- tives to expensive systems.

THE FIRE DIAGRAM
You may find it useful to chart which firing arcs your

zones: fore, forward center, aft center, and aft. These are marked F, FC, AC, and A.
  Light vessels have six zones: fore, forward center, port side, starboard side, aft center, and aft. These are marked F, FC, P, S, AC, and A.
Medium vessels have eight zones: fore, forward port

ship's weapons bear on. This is referred to as a firing dia-side, forward center, forward starboard side, aft port side,

gram.
  First, you'll need to code each type of weapon your ship carries. Use the abbreviations below as a starting point, and add extras as you see fit.

MB-main battery SB-secondary battery TB-tertiary battery ASM-antiship missile launcher SAM-antiair missile launcher TT-torpedo tube
BB-bomb bya

  Mark the general location of each weapon mount by drawing a small circle, square, or triangle in the right part of the diagram and coding it in the manner ex- plained above.

TRIANGLE - standard mount CIRCLE - turret or sponson
SQUARE - missile or bomb launcher or rack

  Indicate which arc of fire the weapon bears on by d-raw ing an arrow from the symbol to each arc it faces. If the weapon can fire into the zero-port or zero-starboard arcs,

aft center, aft starboard side, and aft, or F, FP, FC, FS, AP, AC, AS, and A.
  Heavy vessels have twelve zones: fore, forward center, forward port side, forward starboard side, midships port, center forward, midships starboard, aft port, center aft, aft starboard, aft center, and aft. These are marked F, FC, FP, FS, P, CF, S, AP, CA, AS, AC, A.
  Super-heavy vessels have twenty zones. In addition to the twelve zones of a heavy vessel, super-heavy vessels add forward-forward center, forward-forward port and starboard, port center, starboard center, after-after port, af- ter-after center, and after-after starboard. These are ab- breviated as F, FFP, FFC, FFS, FP, FC, FS, P, PC, CF, SC, S, AP, CA, AS, AAP, AC, AAS, AAC, and A.

Step B: Assign Systems
Every system on your ship needs to go somewheoreu. Y have a great deal of liberty in deciding where a system goes, but here are some basic guidelines.

Weapon Assignments
Weaponscan't be placed in a zone that they couldn't rea- sonably reach their arcs of fire from. For example, a tur-

indicate this by marking a 'z' at the end of arrow. Finally, if ret that is designated to fire forward, port, and starboard

the weapon is a fixed mount, indicate this by marking a 'f' at the end of the arro.w

can't be placed in any zone marked "aft" (or any zone in- cluding 'aft' as part of its title).

102

Hull Point Limits
No zone can contain systems whose hull point total exceed the "zone" limit based on the hull type. For example, -a bat tleship's zone limit is 195 hull points, so the system-s in stalled in a particular zone can't exceed 195 hull points.
  Every zone must contain at least one system. Note that it's risky to leave zones very lightly filled, since zones that

SeeTABLE5-18: HIT LOCATIONS ANDZONELIMITS on the
next page.

Step C: Organizing the Hit Location Zones
After you assign each system on the ship to a particular

are "shot through" in combat will permit fire to reach other zone, the next step is to create the order in which systems

parts of the ship.

Multiple Units
Not all systems of the same type need to go into the same zone. In fact, it's advisable to distribute systems around the hull so that one lucky hit won't take out all of a ship's -pow er, or its weaponry, or whatever. A ship with three power plants may choose to place them in three different zones, group them all together in one zone, or put one plant in one zone and two in another. A ship with twenty crew bunkrooms may put ten in one zone, five more in ano, ther and one each in five zones after that. Weapon systems will frequently be broken up to shoot into different arcs of fire.
Systems that are whole-ship installations (defenses,-recy
clers or life support, and so on) may be distributed around the hull or concentrated in one zone. For example, a d-eflec tion inducer requires an installation of 1 hull point per 20 hull points of the ship to be protected. If the ship is 1,000 hull points, the deflection inducer requires 50 hull points. This can be described as one 50-hull point unit, five 10-

in that zone will be affected by enemy fire. In general, the following order should be used:
• Weapons, from lightest to heaviest firepower
• Defenses
• Sensors
• Comm systems
• Fuel tanks
• Hangars or Cargo
• Accommodations
• Miscellaneous
• Support systems
• Engines
• Power plant
• FTL drive
• Command and computers
• Next zone
  Most zones will only be fitted with two or three of these systems (although small ships will need to load up their hit location zones with a greater variety of equipment). Th- e hi erarchy here assumes that systems at or near the surface

point units, ten 5-point units, or anything else that is- rea	of the ship will be affected first by enemy fire, and systems
sonable. The important thing to remember is this: A failure deeper inside the ship will be affected l.ater

of any component of a whole-ship installation means that the whole installation fails.

Common Sense
  
Within each of these categories, you should designate an order based on the largest (and most likely to be struck) to the smallest system. For example, if a crew bunkroom of 3 hull points and a passenger stateroom of 2 hull poin-ts oc cupy the same zone, the bunkroom goes first on the hit list.

Instead of attempting to legislate every possible arrangemenWt eapons are an exception to this rule; lighter weapons of ship systems into particular zones, we recommend simplyusually have more exposed mountings than heavy using your common sense. If you can reasonably imagine aweapons, so the smallest weapons are affected first. ship with the arrangement you have in mind, it's probably

okay. If you have a hard time imagining how a ship with all of its life support systems concentrated in one zone out of twenty manages to provide a comfortable climate for every- one, you should break up the life support units into separate

Step D: Filling Out the Hit Location Char t

installations and scatter them around the ship.	Refer to the hit location chart Cinhapter 2. Record which
  Another good example of this is the "strategy of the-myr systems are located in each zone, and the hit location roll iad smalls." A ship might devote hundreds of hull points to for each zone.
its engines to achieve a certain level of acceleration. These

could be described as one massive engine, a handful of reasonably sized engines, or many dozens of tiny engines. For the sake of sanity, you might decide that a battleship can't really be powered efficiently by a hundred fighte-r en gines. There is a tangible game benefit to using a number of fighter engines, since dozens of "extra" hit locations will be manufactured by this strategy. But it isn't really in the spirit of the rules.

AN EXAMPLE OF SHIP CONSTRUCTION
Let's say that John has decided that hiLsTEARNITYgame will be based around a large survey cruiser that visits
new planets each week. His campaign is set at Progress Level 7, and all technologies except M (matter coding), T

(teleportation), and X (energy transformation) are availableStep 1: Class and Hull Selection
for this ship.


103

Shackletons' ship; most ships of a particular type share from. The heavy cruiser hull has 400 hull points, plus an the same naming convention, and it seems reasonable toadditional 80 for economy of scale. The heavy cruiser is a name his survey cruisers after the ships of famous ex-medium hull, with medium toughness. It costs 100 million

plorers.

credits.
Table 5-18:  Hit Locations and Zone Limits




Military HullsHull TypeHull PointsZonesZoneLimitSmall CraftFighter1027Strike fighter15210Cutter20214Scout30410Escort40414Light ShipsCorvette80 (+8)622Frigate120 (+12)633Destroyer160 (+16)644Medium ShipsLight cruiser320 (+64)875Heavy cruiser400 (+80)896Armored cruiser480 (+96)8115Heavy ShipsBattlecruiser960 (+288)12156Battleship1200 (+360)12195Fleet carrier1600 (+480)12260Super-heavy ShipsDreadnought3200 (+1600)20480Super-carrier4000 (+2000)20600Super-dread.6400 (+3200)20960Fortress ship12000 (+6000)201800Civilian HullsSmall CraftLaunch825Courier16210Trader2448Fast freighter32411Fast transport40414Light ShipsHauler72 (+7)620Industrial96 (+10)627Medium ShipsMedium freighter240 (+48)858Clipper360 (+72)887Medium transport480 (+96)8115Heavy ShipsTanker720 (+216)12117Liner840 (+252)12137Heavy transport1280 (+384)12208Super-heavy ShipsSuper-freighter2400 (+1200)20360Colony transport3600 (+1800)20540
104

Step 2: Armor	Step 6: Support Systems
TheEnduranceis intended for long-range operation and- ex This step includes four sub-steps: life support, artificial

ploration instead of battle fleet operations-John decides thagtravity, crew accommodations, and stores.
medium armor is fine. Medium armor requires 5 percent of John decides to equip thEendurancewith complete life

the ship's hull points (20, in this case), so Ethnedurance now has 460 hull points remaining for other systems. He

support. He wants the characters in his game to have the choice of wandering all over the ship without the incon- ven

chooses neutronite armor as the best available at PL 7. At ience of suiting up for vacuum work. At PL 7, each -auto 500,000 per hull point, the ship's armor costs 10,000,000. support system covers 40 hull points; 10 will cover th-e en

The ship's armor ratings are d6+1/d6+1/d6 vs. low-im pact, high impact, and energy attacks.

Step 3: Pow er Plant
John doesn't know exactly how much power Ethnedurance

tire ship. Life support takes 10 hull points, 10 power points, and costs 2 million.
Artificial gravity isn't a problem. Since tEhenduranceis a
PL 7 ship with access to Type G (gravity) tech, true artificial gravity is included in the life support system at no extra cost in hull points, power, or money. This protects the crew

is going to need, but a good guideline for a power plant is and the hull from deadly accelerations, and provides a

10 to 15 percent of the hull, or a power output equal to about half the ship's hull. The mass reactor is the best-pow er plant available under his technology restraints, so he

comfortable 1G environment.
  Crew accommodations are a little tricky, since John-does n't really know how many crewmembers tEhnedurancere-

buys 72 hull points of mass reactors to generate 252 -pow quires.TABLE5-1 recommends a crew of 300 for a heavy
er points.	cruiser, so John elects to buy accordingly. Twelve 20-man
  John chooses to install these as 4 18-point reactors. Eachcrew bunkrooms, eight 6-man crew quarters (for senio-r en mass reactor costs 2 million to install and 4.5 million for itslisted hands and junior officers), and nine 2-passenger

size, for a total expense of 26 million.

Step 4: Engines
The induction drive is the best engine available at PL 7. It takes a lot of power, but it offers tremendous acceleration and doesn't need fuel. ReferringTtAoBLE5-4, John finds that allocating 15 percent of the hull to an induction drive will give theEndurancean acceleration of 3. That's pretty fast for a heavy cruiser, but John sees Ethneduranceas a ship designed for speed over protection or firepo.wer
  Fifteen percent of the ship's hull is 60 hull points. The engine consumes 60 power points and costs 31 million. John decides to split this into two 30-hull point engines, which increases the price to 32 million.

Step 5: FTL Driv e
TheEndurancedefinitely needs some kind of faster-than- light drive; it's a survey cruiser, after all. Since John-'s al

staterooms (for the department heads and commandin-g offi cer) total 306 crew accommodations. These require a total of 70 hull points and cost 2,600,000 credits. TEhne- durancemay have up to 29 airlocks installed as part of its crew berthing and general accessib.ility
  Since theEnduranceprovides quarters for 306 crewmembers, it carries 30,600 days of stores, which will be consumed in about three months. John wants to increase this drastically; equipping the ship with recycler units is the best way to do that. Fifteen recycler units reduce the- con sumption of 306 crewmembers to just around 30. At that rate, it will take 1,000 days-almost three years-to deplete the ship's stocks of food, water, and oxygen. The recycler units take 15 hull points, 15 points of power, and cost 4.5 million credits.

Step 7: Weapons
TheEnduranceis primarily an exploration vessel, not a battle-line warship, but it still needs some serious weaponry

ready decided that the energy transformation and tele-porta for self-defense.

tion technologies aren't available, the stardrive is the best remaining option.
  The stardrive requires 5 percent of the hull, or 20 hull points. It takes 60 power points to activate the device, but
  
First, John installs a main battery of 6 matter beam-s, or ganized into two triple-mount turrets. Each cannon costs 25 million and takes up 14 hull points after the turret penalty is figured in. However, in a triple mount, three guns take up

this power only needs to be available to enter drivespace-the space and have the cost of two guns mounted s.ingly
the Endurancecan shut off its induction engines or	So, instead of spending 84 hull points and 150 million, the
weapons systems to free up the power points for a starfall.triple mounts reduce the cost to 55 hull points and 100

With 60 power points, theEndurancecan leap up to 20 light-years in one starfall; if all of the ship's power is brought to bear, it can make a starfall of 39 light-years.
A stardrive of 20 hull points costs 22 million credits.

million. The beams consume 11 points of power each. John decides that one turret is mounted to fire forward, port, and starboard, while the other is mounted to fire aft, port, and starboard.
  Next, John decides to install something for an extra punch. He decides that two plasma torpedoes in fixed

mounts are fairly economical for space and power, and provide theEndurancewith a heavy-firepower weapon. In a fixed mount, each torpedo only takes 8 hull points and costs 7.5 million credits. It uses 15 power points.
  Finally, John arms theEndurancewith a secondary battery of 18 mass cannon in triple turrets. A single mass cannon requires 2 hull points, 3 power points, and 300,000 credits. Mounting the weapons in turrets raises this to 3 hull points and 375,000 each. However, the triple mount means that three weapons count for two in terms of space and money, so only twelve of the eighteen add to the ship's space re-
  
Finally, John equips thEendurancewith a communication suite of 4 radio transceivers and 2 mass transceivers.
These take up 4 hull points and cost 300,000. If all comm systems are in use at the same time (a rare event), they consume 6 power points.

Step 10:  Sensors
Since the whole point of a survey cruiser is to gather -infor mation, John lavishes money on the ship's sensors. He starts with a multiband radar, purchased four times to cover

105


quirements and construction costs. The mass cannon batteryall four arcs, then purchased four more times to increase totals 30 hull points, 54 power, and 4.5 million. John distrib- tracking from 40 contacts to 200 contacts at once. Then he utes the turrets around the ship so that three each cover the purchases a backup multiband radar to cover all four arcs zero-port and zero-starboard arcs, three each cover the port with tracking up to 120 contacts.

and starboard arcs, four bear forward, and two bear aft. (Each turret bears in three arcs.) The mass cannon should serve well against enemy missiles and small craft.
  The armament may be a little light for a heavy cru,iser but you'll recall that theEndurancecarries full life support and recycling, and she's fast. Combat is a secondary role, but watch out for the plasma torpedo!
  John realizes that he's running short on power at this point. He'll need more to fight the ship effectively. H-e re
  
Next, he purchases a mass detector and an EM det,ector expands their coverage to four arcs, and buys up their tracking to 120 contacts. He finishes with a hi-res video system for all four arcs, and then a spectroanalyzer (useful for scientific work of all kinds).
The sensors total 16 hull points and 19 power points.

Step 11: Hangars and Small Cr	aft

turns to Step 3 and increases the power plant from 72 hull What's a survey cruiser without a couple of small sh-uttle

points to 84 hull points.

Step 8: Defenses
John needs to give thEendurancesome high-tech defenses. The particle screen is probably the best bet at PL 7, but John decides that it takes too much power and space, and settles for the deflection inducer as his ship's primar-y de

craft? While John would love to embark a number of launches or fighters on board thEendurance,there just isn't room. He decides to settle for two launches, which require a hangar of 16 hull points. (He'll design the launches later.) A hangar of 16 hull points costs 500,000.

Step 12:  Miscellaneous

fense. Since the Endurance is a cruiser of 400 hull points, it needs 20 inducers. This takes 20 hull points and 40 points

Installations

of power, and costs 10 million.
  He also equips the ship with a jammer. The jamme-r re quires 4 hull points and 4 power points to cover a ship of 400 hull points; the cost for the system is 400,000. John would like to get some damage control, but he has other

Now for the final details. First, John wants to make sure that the player characters have plenty of opportunities to get off the ship if it ever gets blown to pieces by enemy action. He installs an evacuation system capable of handling 300 crew members, which takes 13 hull points in addition to th-e ba

systems he needs to address first. All ships are assumed tosic 4 hull points of the installation, a total of 17 hull points.

have some amount of integral damage control, any.way

Step 9: Command, Computers, and Communica tions
John starts by buying a command deck for tEhnedurance,

He has 14 hull points left to fill.
  In addition to the evacuation system, John purchases a brig, a fabrication facility, a lab section, a sick bay, and a cargo hold to round out thEendurance.With one hull point
left over, he decides to install a security suite that covers 40 hull points of the ship-probably the command deck, the computer room, and a few other important areas. Joh-n fig

one of the few systems that's mandatory for a starship. Thisures he'll decide exactly what is covered later on.
takes 6 hull points, and costs 1.8 million.	None of the miscellaneous systems are exactly lavish, but
  Next, John he buys the best suite of computers available. each adds some basic functionality to the hull: security, a He chooses a Good computer core, Good fire control computs-mall hospital, science facilities, repair facilities, and a- hun ers for each of the three weapon batteries, three Good sensodrred cubic meters of cargo space. You never know what computers, a Good tactical control computer, and a Good navy-ou might need in deep space exploration.
igation control computer (Note that John doesn't know exactly John could go back and fiddle with the design to make
how much the sensor control computers will cost until he ac-more room for special facilities, but he decides that the
tually buys his ship's sensors; we filled this in e.)arly	basic plan is sound. ThEenduranceis done. The final

106	The Endurance
TypeSystemHull PtsPow. Req.CostHullHeavy cruiser400 (+80)-$100 MArmorMedium neutronite20-$10 MPower4x 21-pt mass reactor84+294$29 MEngine2x 30-pt induction drive6060$32 MFTLStardrive20(60+)$22 MSupport10x autosupport1010$2 M12x crew bunkroom36-$0.48 M8x crew quarters16-$0.16 M6x staterooms12-$0.3 M15x recyclers1515$4.5 MWeapons2x3 matter beam turret5666$100 M1 fixed plasma torpedo815$7.5 M6x3 mass cannon turret3654$4.5 MDefense20x deflection inducers2040$10 M4x jammer44$0.4 MCommandCommand deck6-$1.8 M2x mass transceivers22$0.2 M4x radio transceivers24$0.1 MComputer core, Good22$2 M3x Fire control, Good3-$38.7 MTactical control, Good1-$0.2 MNav control, Good1-$0.75 M3x Sensor control, Good3-$3,3 MSensorsMultiband radar #148$0.4 MMultiband radar #236$0.3 MMass detector44$0.4 MEM detector2-$0.08 MHi-res video2-$0.04 MSpectroanalyzer11$0.1 MHangarHangar16-$0.5 MMisc.Evacuation system17-$0.9 MBrig2-$0.02 MLab section2-$0.1 MSick bay2-$0.15 MFabrication facility42$0.2 MCargo hold3-$0.05 MSecurity suite11$0.2 MDAMAGE DIAGRAM
F	Plasma torpedo, hi-res video, mass transceiver, cargo hold, evac system (4 pods), bunkroom, bunkroom, crew quarters, lab section, recycler (6 pts), autosupport (4 pts), power plant #1
FP	Mass cannon turret #2, mass cannon turret #4, radio transceiver, evac system (4 pods), bunkroom, bunkroom, cr quarters, stateroom, stateroom, recycler (3 pts)
FC		Matter beam turret A, jammer, multiband radar #1, mass detector, spectroanalyzer, evac system (main-4 pods) crew quarters, recycler (3 pts), power plant #2, stardrive
FS	Mass cannon turret #1, mass cannon turret #3, radio transceiver, evac system (4 pods), bunkroom, bunkroom, cr quarters, stateroom, stateroom, recycler (3 pts)
AP		Mass cannon turret #6, radio transceiver, evac system (4 pods), bunkroom, bunkroom, crew quarters, stateroom autosupport (3 pts), induction engine #2
AC	Matter beam turret X, deflection inducer, multiband radar #2, EM detector, evac system (4 pods), siyc,kpboawer plant #3, command deck, security suite, computer core and control computers
AS	Mass cannon turret #5, radio transceiver, evac system (4 pods), bunkroom, bunkroom, crew quarters, stateroom autosupport (3 pts), induction engine #1
A	mass transceiver, hangar, evac system (2 pods), bunkroom, bunkroom, crew quarters, crew quarters, brig, fabrication facility, power plant #4

price tag is over 370 million credits. Major warships aren't cheap!

The Damage Diagram
Everything fits in the hull, there's enough power to run everything that needs to run at the same time, aonhdnJ doesn't have any financial constraints to discourage him from a 372 million cruiser. The last step for tEhne - duranceis to allocate systems to hit locations. What's where, in general terms?
  John refers to ATBLE5-18 and discovers that, as a Medium ship, theEndurancemust divide its systems into
  
Since the evacuation system is prioritized as a hangar, John scatters escape pods all over the ship. Unlike the deflection inducer, this makes sense: it doesn't matter if a small number of evacuation pods are destroyed, it doesn't really affect the functionality of the entire system, so he might as well disperse them. Accommodations de- serve a similar treatment, as do the ship's support sys- tems.
Finally, John gets to the major engineering systems:
engines, power plants, and the FTL drive. There's no reason he couldn't place all of them in the front of the ship, the back of the ship, or the port side, but it suits his sense of aesthetics to balance out these systems and

107



eight zones or locations. Since the ship is a heavy cruiser,protect them in the middle of the ship as best he can. He it cannot hold more than 96 hull points worth of systems places the two big induction engines in the AS and AP
in any single zone.	zones, even though he'd rather hide them in the center
He begins by placing the weapons, since they're the first of the ship. But the forward center and aft center sec-

priority on the hit chart anyway. The matter beam turrets are pretty clearly in central locations, with one facing- for ward and one facing aft, so John selects the FC and AC

tions are getting pretty full, and John decides he wants to use them to protect more important systems.
The power plants he places in the four centerline

(forward center and aft center) zones for the big guns. The zones: F, FC, AC, and A. Enemy fire may take out one of
plasma torpedo is a fixed mount weapon firing forward;	the power plants pretty easily, but the only way Ethne-
John puts in the F (forward) section. Since the mass cannondurancecould lose power altogether is if the entire ship

turrets are arranged with 4 covering the front and sides and 2 covering the stern and sides, John puts two turrets

is riddled to the point of uselessness. John places the stardrive in the FC section, which almost fills that section

each in the FP and FS (forward port and forward starboardt)o its limit (91 hull points installed out of a maximum of

zones, and one turret each in the AP and AS zones.
Next come defenses. John decides to keep the deflection

96).
Finally, John finishes by placing the command deck,

inducer as one big 20-point installation; breaking it up into security suite, and the ship's computers in the AC zone.

a number of small installations is a poor idea, since a hit againstany of the deflection inducers will knock down the

The AC zone is pretty full, too, at 95 out of 96 hull point maximum.

shields for the whole ship. It's better to reduce the chance of Overall, theEnduranceis very symmetrically

the deflection inducer being hit at all by limiting its e-xpo sure to a single zone, so John drops it in the AC zone.
Sensors and communications systems John scatters

arranged, even though this is not a requirement at all. Its weapons are placed in areas that would logically be useful considering the assigned arcs of fireo.nvNital

around the ship, with a preference toward the FC and ACsystems are dispersed around the ship, while a handful

zones-the hit chart for a Medium ship tends to shelter these locations a little more than the other areas of the ship. He places the hangar in the aft section, since it's pretty big and it needs to go somewhere.

of critical systems are buried in the relatively safe center areas. It's a pretty good arrangement, and one that could be easily rendered into a map or deckplan with a little work and artistic license.

108

CHAPTER 6: STATIONS AND BASES

Spaceships aren't the only platforms for weapons, sen- sors, docking facilities, and other such tasks that exist in a

Ground Base

science fiction setting. Space stations and ground bases ofA- ground base consists of a good-sized stretch of land on ten have many of the same missions and capabilities, andwhich a number of free-standing buildings and structures are even more commonplace than large warships or com-have been built. sUually, a ground base is located on a

mercial ships. A space station is basically a ship without engines-and, to extend the analogy, a ground base is a ship without engines or life support (although that de- pends on the local conditions).
  Note: This final chapter oWf arshipswas not complet- ed before the cancellation of the product line. However,

planetary surface with environmental conditions more or less suitable for human life, but a large base with sealed buildings and bunkers linked by subterranean transit tubes could be built on airless worlds. Ground bases may be built for a number of reasons: supply depots, naval re- pair and refueling, observation, defense, scientific re-

we include these sections as originally written, along withsearch, heavy industry, trade and commerce, or even just TABLE6-1 below, to serve as a good starting point for you habitation.

to use to develop your own stations and bases.

FACILITIES
    In very general terms, there are three types of stations:
  
Ground bases can exceed the size of even the largest starships. A major defensive complex and naval base might sprawl for hundreds of kilometers, ringed by pow- erful bunkers and dotted with hardened shelters for grounded ships. Small ground bases are cheap compared

ground bases, outposts, and space stations. You might alstoo spaceships; they can make use of bulky and inexpen-
consider any kind of industrial complex or settlement to sive materials such as reinforced concrete or fused rock.
be a potential station or base, but that exceeds the scope The largest ground bases may cost three or four times as
of this product.	much as a fortress ship and beggar a galactic civilization.


Table 6-1:  Stations and Bases


InstallationHull Pts5%10%Tough TargetswmcZonesLimitCrewCostLightHabitat Dome100 (+10)510Small 0 steps252513762810$5 MLight Platform150 (+15)815Light 0 steps3838191064115$10 MLight Post200 (+20)1020Light -1 step5050251365520$20 MMediumHab Complex 300 (+60)	15	30Light-1 step38381910872150$30 MMedium Platform400 (+80)	20	40Med-1 step50502513896200$60 MMedium Bunker600 (+120)	30	60Med-2 steps757538198144300$100 MHeavy ShipsHeavy Platform1000 (+300)	50	100Hvy-3 steps6363321612163500$250 MHeavy Bunker 2000 (+600)	100 200Hvy-4 steps1251256332123251000$500 MSuper-heavy ShipsSuper Platform10000 (+5000) 500 1000S-Hvy-4 steps313313157782015002500$5000 MFortress	20000 (+10000)1000 2000S-Hvy-5 steps6256253131572030005000$20000 M
  Hull Points:The number of hull points available in this type, representing its capacity for installing systems. The -first num ber is the basic hull point total, the number in parenthesis is the bonus hull point total.
Tough:The installation's toughness rating.
Target:The installation's basic resistance modifier to enemy fire, based on its size.
  5% and 10%:This is the number of hull points a system requiring 5 or 10 percent of the hull requires. This information is simply a shortcut to save you time and effort. Note that you can add them to get 15 percent, double the 10 percent score to get 20 percent, etc., etc.
S, W, M, C:The installation's Stun, Wound, Mortal, and Critical damage tracks.
Crew:For information purposes only, a general estimate of how many crewmen a typical installation of this size requires. Cost:The cost of the hull, in credits, Concord dollars, or the appropriate currency for your campaign.

Outpost
An outpost is a sealed structure built on or in a significant body-a planet, moon, or asteroid. While a ground base is really a collection of buildings sharing a common purpose, an outpost is more like a spaceship built on the grounsd. It' designed to protect its inhabitants from the environment around them, and it's usually placed in a location that no one would want to live in if there wasn't some overriding reason to be there.

indigenous population of a primitive world may never even detect an orbital station if the visitors overhead don't want to be seen.

MISSIONS
  For purposes oWf arships,a base or station exists to per- form one of four basic missions: defense, observation, space- port, or shipyard. While there are many other reasons to build an outpost or a space station, these four reasons have the

109

  Like a spaceship, an outpost can be pictured as a c-ollec most bearing on the action and support of major warships. tion of systems all located in the same general vicinity-. Out

posts are cheaper than spacecraft of similar size, since bulky but inexpensive materials such as concrete and rock can be used freely in their construction.
An outpost doesn't need engines and doesn't have to

Defense
This is perhaps the simplest mission to describe. A base or station designed for defensive purposes is armed with

worry about drifting into the nearest gravity well if ser-ious heavy anti-ship weapons and sited in some location where

ly damaged by enemy fire. Since outposts (and ground bases, for that matter) don't have to devote space and

enemy vessels are not welcome. Defensive stations may be placed to support the passive defense of a star system or

equipment to mobility, they are more heavily armed an-d ar planet, much like the coastal fortresses and shore batteries

mored than a similarly sized spacecraft. In fact, it's d-own right dangerous to attack a serious defensive installation. But the base can't ever run away, and the enemy always knows where to find it.

Space Stations

of a seagoing nav.y
  Defensive stations can also assume an offensive role by interdicting an enemy planet, system, or transit route. Two battle platforms towed into opposing orbits around an- ene my planet would form a fairly effective blockading force, while a battle station protecting a wormhole or stargate of some kind could very easily bar the passage of enemy

Compared to an outpost or ground base, a space station isships. If the science of the campaign allows for the creation

more expensive and more vulnerable. So why build a space station when an outpost would do?

of chokepoints in space, some specific place where s-pace shipsmust pass in order to reach other locations, a po-wer

  First, not all planets or positions are suitable for bases orful star-fortress may be able to completely immobilize- ene outposts. A space station has to compensate for a number omf y movements.
hostile factors-vacuum, climate control, and radiation, The measure of a defense station's capability is pretty among others-and these factors can be defeated com-petenstimple: How much weaponry does it support, and ho-w re ly by any civilization capable of building vessels for spacesistant is it to enemy fire? Defense bases or stations may travel. But the engineering challenges posed by building inrange from a small missile battery or a pair of fusion
the atmospheres of Jovian worlds or the murderous te-mperbeams in a hardened bunker to titanic orbital battle-stations ature extremes of Mercurian worlds may not be so easilycapable of standing off a squadron of battleships. conquered. A space station orbiting the planet in question can
perform many of the same functions as a ground base, and Defensive Systems

be easier to build and operate too.
  Secondly, space stations are mobile. Even if they lack propulsion of their own, it's possible to tow most spac-e sta tions to new positions once they've outlived their usefulness in their original position. Ground bases are much less portable.

Type Zero: none Type One:
Type Two: sparse defense network Type Three: small network
Type Four: armed space stations
Type Five: planetary shields, advanced satellites and

Next, many facilities or industries are more efficient in
zero-G than they would on the ground. For example, the size of a drydock or cradle offers serious constraints to the size of a spaceship that can be built in a ground-based

weaponry


Ship yard

shipyard, but an orbital shipyard can make use of zGero- construction techniques to build much bigger ships.

Shipyards are a special type of ground base or space station. Any ship bigger than a corvette or light freighter requires a

Finally, there are tactical advantages to a position in orbitmajor shipyard for its construction. The construction of a

or in open space. The space station's sensors don't have permanent blind spots behind the bulk of a planet, o-r dis tortions due to atmospheric interference. Ground forces from a hostile planet can't attack a space station, and the

large ship is not only a highly technical process, but also a process requiring the ability to manipulate thousands (s-ome times hundreds of thousands) of tons of the toughest and most durable materials around. The industrial machine-ry re

110

quired to fashion hundreds of precisely shaped hull plates oar rmored turret assemblies or induction engines from a-plan structures weighing hundreds of tons is immense. Mill-s, reet's surface to high orbit is obviously a difficult process.-How fineries, power plants, and manufacturing facilities capable oefver, a serious space-based manufacturing capability allows producing each component of the new vessel limit a plsanet'the shipyard to build and outfit these components witho-ut lift

ability to rapidly construct large numbers of big ships.	ing anything other than people from the planet b.elow

  Most large shipyards are located in one of three places: high orbit around an industrialized planet, a stable trailin-g or bit (or LaGrange point) a few million kilometers away, or in

STATIONS IN COMBAT

the vicinity of an asteroid belt. While planet-bound shipyardsHits in one zone of a ground base never "bleed through" to are still quite common, it's much easier for very large shipsanother zone, unless the attacking weapon is an area effect to be built in low- or zero-gravity conditions. The disad- vandevice. In other words, when Building 1 has been pulverized, tage of working in space, of course, is the fact that the workleftover damage does not spill over and wreck Building 2. force must be housed somewhere near their job, and thaTt his is because most ground bases make use of the loc-al ter power, materials, and supplies must be provided to the siterain and the lack of space constraints to disperse important of the work. Lifting extremely massive sub-components likestructures. Subsequent hits that strike the same "zone" are
basically wasted.


APPENDIX: SPACE COMBAT HEX MAPS
The last two pages of this book- of fer hex maps for use in playing out space combat scenarios. Both a color and a black-and-white v-er sion are presented here; we r-ec ommend using the n"egative" (white) version for photocopying. You can use starship miniatures or even tokens or coins to represent the ships of each sidde.

111


112

